To the Editor:''Malaria Makes a Comeback, and Is More Deadly Than Ever'' (front page, Jan. 8) captures the multiple factors -- population movements, chemical resistance, lapsed public health vigilance and environmental change -- influencing the resurgence of malaria. Mosquitoes, the transmitters of the disease, are indeed quintessential opportunists and adapt readily in disturbed environments. As co-author of the World Health Organization report discussed in your article, I offer several recent findings. Consistent with model projections that global warming could hasten the geographic spread of malaria and dengue fever, these devastating diseases are now occurring at high altitudes in Latin America, central Africa and Asia. Cerebral malaria has occurred in Nairobi, Kenya, while dengue fever is found in the mountains around San Jose, Costa Rica. Moreover, highland malaria and dengue fever are occurring in the context of upward migration of plants on many continents and summit glacial retreat in Latin America, Europe, central Africa and Asia. A recent study in the journal Nature confirmed that the freezing levels in the mountains have indeed shifted upward about 500 feet since 1970, representing a warming of close to 2 degrees Fahrenheit. As we enter a year of debate concerning climate change (the convention will be held in Kyoto, Japan, in  December), it is prudent to examine the potential consequences associated with continued warming and climate instability. Your article says that malaria ''hinders economic development''; epidemics are growing ever more costly in terms of health, development, trade and tourism. While the resurgence of infectious disease has multiple social, biological and environmental roots, meteorological factors may play an increasing role in the future. We may be vastly underestimating the social and economic damages associated with epidemics and extreme weather events as well as the potential benefits to society as a whole of changing our environmental and energy policies. PAUL R. EPSTEIN, M.D.  Boston, Jan. 8, 1997  The writer is associate director of the Center for Health and the Global Environment at Harvard Medical School.

 ''Market-based approaches to coping with climate change generate as much consensus among economists as free trade,'' explains Paul Krugman of M.I.T., one of the organizers of the statement. More important, the statement focuses on what is now regarded by insiders as a make-it-or-break-it issue in slowing atmospheric warming: designing an international system that permits rich economies to contribute cash in lieu of emissions reductions. ''Allowing some to pay others to reduce greenhouse emissions could reduce the total cost by 80 to 90 percent,'' estimates William Nordhaus, an economist at Yale and another organizer of the statement. Like any committee looking for consensus, the drafters of the climate statement cast their net widely. ''We believe that global climate change carries with it significant environmental, economic, social and geopolitical risks, and that preventive steps are justified,'' the unshocking introduction reads. Those who read on, however, will discover there is meat on these bones: ''Sound economic analysis,'' the authors argue, ''shows that there are policy options that would slow climate change without harming American living standards.''And what might these policy options be? Here, the drafters stake out a position that seems almost obvious to economists, but has barely entered the consciousness of environmental policy makers. ''A cooperative approach among nations is required -- such as an international emissions trading agreement,'' the statement asserts. To understand where the economists really want the diplomats to go, consider where we are now. Current rates of deforestation and combustion of carbon-based fuels -- coal, oil, gas -- are adding carbon dioxide into the atmosphere faster than the oceans can absorb it. The higher carbon dioxide concentrations trap solar energy. Rising temperatures will likely change weather patterns radically and raise the level of the oceans. Governments of all the major economies are vaguely committed to containing greenhouse gas emissions before once-a-century hurricanes become an annual event in the Caribbean, Kansas turns into a dust bowl and the Bay of Bengal doubles in size at the expense of Bangladesh. But the emphasis is on the vague: the process of setting emissions targets or creating political institutions to enforce the targets is in the talking stage. That's where the economists' statement fits in. ''We wanted to be there early,'' said Stephen DeCanio of the University of California at Santa Barbara, ''before governments and politicians were locked into positions.'' Specifically, the statement is intended to give the Clinton Administration some help in pressing the idea of creating an international market in emissions permits at the next global meeting on climate change, set for Kyoto, Japan, in December. The idea is simple. If and when world leaders start to deal with the practical issues, they are apt to set national targets for containing emissions that will be very expensive to meet in the rich industrial economies, and probably won't be honored in the large emerging economies like China, Russia, India and Indonesia. Creating an emissions trading system that allows already rich economies to pay the emerging economies to use less energy and less carbon-intensive fuels as they develop offers a double dividend. It reduces the cost for developed countries, in turn reducing the chances their legislatures will balk. And it creates a pool of capital to be used as an incentive to push emerging economies toward environmentally benign growth. Translation: Getting, say, China or India to switch from coal to natural gas, or to encourage energy conservation by charging world market prices at home would be a lot easier if they were paid billions of dollars each year to do it. Not every economist who favors emissions trading signed the statement. ''I'm worried it will be used at Kyoto to commit America to useless, expensive unilateral actions in reducing emissions,'' says Robert Hahn, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute. But Mr. Nordhaus has very different worries. ''Economists haven't been important players in environmental policy over the last 30 years,'' he said. ''This time we could make a difference.''Economic Scene

Bookkeeping gimmicks employed to simulate big reductions. Promises of a decisive decrease, but not until somebody else is in office. Borrowing against future generations. Sound like the old Reagan-era budget schemes? Actually, these statements describe the Clinton Administration's plan for curbing emissions of gases that may cause the greenhouse effect. Not only is the Administration surprisingly irresolute on reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases, but it is also missing a golden opportunity to advocate a reform that would help the environment and increase industrial efficiency: a tax on the burning of fossil fuels that would be offset by cuts in other corporate taxes. A treaty signed by more than 150 countries in 1992 in Rio de Janiero committed them to reducing emissions that may cause artificial global warming. Two international summits in Kyoto, Japan, later this year will supposedly bring the agreement into force. But many countries hope to wriggle out of their commitments, and the United States is doing some of the most uninhibited wriggling. In its proposal, recently submitted to the United Nations, the Administration has set laudable long-term goals for reducing worldwide emissions. The catch is that the plan would not have teeth until 2010 -- long after President Clinton has left office (even a two-term Gore Presidency could have ended). For public relations purposes, the Administration is insisting that its proposal is ''binding.'' But the plan is backed up by little more than an honor system. It is as if the White House said there will be a ''binding'' law against speeding, but that no tickets would be issued until 2010. The Clinton proposal would even allow governments to appear to be making greenhouse progress by ''borrowing'' credits from future years -- claiming a decrease today through nothing more than a pledge to cut emissions in the distant future. During the 1992 Presidential campaign, Al Gore repeatedly excoriated President George Bush for failing to support binding reductions in greenhouse gases by 2000. Now, apparently not wanting to upset industry, the Administration says that short-term greenhouse gas reductions would unnecessarily burden manufacturers. It has defined ''short term'' as anything before the year 2010. If Vice President Gore really believed, as he once said, that the possibility of global warming is ''the worst crisis our country has ever faced,'' why is the White House plan so meek? The Administration plan does have a couple of good initiatives among its weaknesses. One is that companies would, as an alternative to cutting their own emissions, be able to buy greenhouse gas ''credits'' from other factories that cut their emissions to even lower levels than required. The model for this plan is a 1990 law that allows the trading of permits for emissions that produce acid rain. This has helped cut acid rain faster than expected and at about one-tenth the cost projected by the Bush Administration. The White House plan would also allow corporations to gain credits for  greenhouse gas emissions by helping to reduce pollution in fast-growing countries like China. American companies could then forgo expensive renovations of their relatively efficient factories in the United States by, say,  paying for the modernization of hugely inefficient Chinese power plants. This would help cut overall global emissions while sending Western money and technology to other countries. Still, the Clinton plan overlooks a far more effective incentive to reduce greenhouse gases: imposing a tax on the burning of fossil fuels. At the same time, other corporate taxes could be reduced. You can be a skeptic about whether dangerous global warming has been proved -- I certainly am -- and still support these carbon taxes. Moderate taxes on the greenhouse emissions of power plants, factories and automobiles would create an incentive for improved energy efficiency, which is in the national interest regardless of whether the global temperature is rising, falling or doing nothing at all. A 1992 Bush Administration study found that greenhouse gases could be cut by up to 11 percent with no cost to the economy, considering the value of fuel savings. A levy on the consumption of fossil fuels is attractive because it shifts the tax burden toward pollution, a negative, and away from capital and labor, which are positives. That is why more than 2,000 economists from across the political spectrum, including six Nobel laureates, signed a statement last month calling for carbon taxes as part of a system of tradeable permits for greenhouse emissions. Carbon taxes would reward the efficient use of natural resources and cut greenhouse gas emissions without harming industry. Surely a President who cannot run again -- and a Vice President who believes global warming to be a serious threat -- could  support such progressive goals. Gregg Easterbrook, a contributing editor of The Atlantic Monthly, is the author of ''A Moment on the Earth: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism.''

Five years ago, more than 100 world leaders came together for the first international Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, leaving a diaphanous trail of promises to clean the earth's atmosphere, save its rain forests and otherwise collaborate on common environmental challenges. Many of these leaders or their successors will convene at the United Nations this week to review their work. There is little to celebrate. The oceans are as polluted as ever, and deforestation proceeds at a ruinous pace. Perhaps the most conspicuous failure, however, involves the hugely contentious subject of global warming. President Clinton cannot avoid addressing that issue when he speaks on Thursday. With only 4 percent of the world's population, the United States produces more than a fifth of the ''greenhouse gases'' like carbon dioxide that are contributing to a gradual and potentially disruptive warming of the earth's surface. Moreover, the United States has fallen well short of its Rio pledge to stabilize greenhouse emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000. Only two of the industrialized nations that joined in that pledge, Germany and Britain, are expected to meet their targets. The United States will exceed it by 13 percent or more. The Administration has already conceded that the voluntary approach endorsed in Rio is not working and that it will accept ''binding,'' enforceable targets on greenhouse emissions if other industrialized nations go along. Mr. Clinton does not have to go much beyond that in his speech. A global treaty will not be signed until a final meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in December. But he has to sketch the outlines of a credible and economically feasible plan aimed at the earliest possible reductions. He must also send a strong signal that if there is a final agreement in Kyoto, he and his Vice President, Al Gore, will work hard to get it through Congress. Any serious plan to reduce greenhouse gases will carry political risks because it will not be cost-free. Mr. Clinton's audience will want to know whether he and Mr. Gore are up to the challenge. The President has one important thing going for him. There is a far broader scientific consensus on global warming than there was in Rio five years ago and there are many more creative ideas about how to address it. Here is where the issue stands. The Science. One reason why the industrialized nations opted for voluntary targets in Rio was that mainstream scientists simply could not agree whether man-made emissions had contributed to the small rise in global temperatures that began late in the 19th century. In 1995, however, the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, consisting of about 2,500 scientists, concluded that they had. Their language was cautious, their forecasts were gloomy. Unless the current rates of combustion of carbon-based fuels -- coal, gas, oil -- could be reduced, they warned, temperatures would rise between 1.8 and 6.3 degrees Fahrenheit over the next century. Temperature changes in the middle level of that scale could cause a 20-inch rise in sea levels that would flood coastal lowlands and tropical islands, an increase in weather extremes, and global damage to forests and croplands. Despite challenges from businesses, which have been attacking the science in tobacco-industry fashion, the U.N. panel has not retreated from its basic findings. Remedies and Costs. About one-third of the atmosphere's greenhouse gases is produced by electric power plants, one-third by cars and trucks and one-third by other commercial enterprises and ordinary households. Reducing these gases not only means using less energy. It will also require expensive investments in cleaner fuels, cleaner cars and new technologies. Some industrial spokesmen have said that this is a recipe for national bankruptcy. Earlier this year, however, about 2,000 economists signed a statement asserting that the benefits of action on climate change outweighed the costs and that a well-tailored plan relying totally on market mechanisms could actually improve productivity. A study by the World Resources Institute reached the same conclusion. Both the economists and the study suggested that one mechanism could be a carbon tax that would make coal and petroleum fuels more costly and discourage consumption. The revenue from the tax would then be recycled into the economy in the form of lower payroll and corporate taxes, thus encouraging new investment. Since a carbon tax is unlikely to fly in Congress, both the economists and the study suggested a more politically palatable option that the Administration has generally embraced -- an international emissions-trading scheme that would set a global ceiling on emissions and give each country a national ceiling. The idea behind this scheme is that rich nations who cannot keep within their limits without crippling financial investments will be able to ''buy'' pollution permits from poorer countries whose economies are so inefficient that even the tiniest adjustments can achieve big reductions in greenhouse emissions. This mechanism is not without flaws, and it remains to be seen whether everyone can agree on such a complicated scheme before Kyoto. But in the long run Mr. Clinton's greatest problem may to be to convince Congress, which must ratify whatever emerges from Kyoto, to take the issue of global warming as seriously as the scientists do. That means taking it seriously himself and getting his Vice President, who has been silent on the issue of late, to speak out. It was Mr. Gore, after all, who asserted in ''Earth in the Balance'' that global warming ''threatens to destroy the climate equilibrium we have known for the entire history of the human race. . . . The longer we wait, the more unpleasant our choices become.''

The leaders of the eight countries that together represent about half of the world's economic activity called today for rapid democratic elections in Hong Kong, renewed energy to break the stalemate in the Middle East, a new commitment to peace in Bosnia, and new aid for Africa. But in a sharp dispute with France and other European nations that dominated this morning's final session of ''The Summit of the Eight,'' President Clinton refused to commit the United States to a specific reduction in the emission of carbon dioxide and the other greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming, agreeing only to ''substantial reductions'' by 2010. Mr. Clinton also acknowledged, in his closing news conference, that he had failed to resolve differences with France and Italy over how many countries should be invited to join NATO in the first round of expansion, with the Madrid summit meeting of the Atlantic alliance less than six weeks away. While all 16 NATO countries agree that Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic should be invited to join in Madrid, the United States has flatly rejected French and Italian arguments that Romania and Slovenia should also come in now. Other countries also favor the admission of Slovenia, but Mr. Clinton  said an initial NATO expansion is best limited to those countries that are ''most qualified'' to enter, while leaving the door open to further expansions later. Referring to Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, said today that ''there is a consensus around the three, but there is not a consensus around the others,'' and that invitations would go to those countries where there was consensus. While Mr. Clinton hoped to reach agreement before the Madrid meeting, Mr. Berger noted that the new  Prime Minister of Britain, Tony Blair, now supports the American position. In his news conference, Mr. Clinton also defended his policies toward China and the Middle East. He called for the House of Representatives, in a vote expected this week, to support his extension of a normal trading status with China, arguing that ''we shouldn't assume bad faith on the part of the Chinese'' in their commitment to provide Hong Kong ''a high degree of autonomy.''Still, over Chinese objections, the group of eight countries here -- Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States and Russia -- urged Beijing to guarantee Hong Kong's ''fundamental freedoms and the rule of law,'' its independent economic and monetary system, and to hold ''democratic elections'' for a new legislature ''as soon as possible.''The final communique, in its section on the Middle East, also implicitly criticized Washington. ''The peace process faces a crisis, and we are determined to re-inject momentum into it,'' the document said. But Mr. Clinton rejected calls from President Jacques Chirac of France and other leaders to get more visibly involved in pushing the Israelis and Palestinians back to the negotiating table. A senior American official said today that the refusal of Mr. Clinton and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright to go to the Middle East showed courage. ''The tough choice she and the President are making is to sit tight and wait for the parties to realize that they must take the steps necessary to get the process back on track.''Mr. Clinton noted that the Middle East is at ''a pivotal moment'' and added: ''You should never believe that just because you don't see high-level air transport between Washington and the Middle East that nothing is going on from our point of view. I spend quite a bit of time on this every week.''And he repeated his position that to restore confidence, the Palestinans must ''express clear opposition to terrorism'' and commitment to the peace effort, while the Israelis ''need to show in specific ways'' that they are committed to the existing Oslo peace accords and will not try to undermine them unilaterally. The summit meeting was notable for its inclusion of Russia as a full member in all sessions except a one-hour monetary meeting on Saturday, and Mr. Clinton again praised Russia's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, and the Russian people today for pursuing a path toward democracy, market development and integration with the West. Mr. Yeltsin, who underwent heart surgery last year, skipped last night's boisterous entertainment because of fatigue. He did meet with Mr. Chirac today and participated in the closing sessions, although he appeared grimmer and more pasty. Ms. Albright spent some of her time here exploring how the former Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot, might be brought to international justice for the genocidal crimes his government committed in Cambodia from 1975 to 1979, officials said. Mr. Clinton said that ''there probably should be an international war crimes tribunal'' that is permanent. But the main topic of contention was the environment and greenhouse gases, with Mr. Chirac, described by American officials as ''prickly and aggressive,'' pushing hard for a specific American commitment to match Europe's. The European Union agreed last week to cut its emissions of greenhouse gases to 15 percent of its 1990 levels by 2010. Mr. Clinton refused to commit to a specific figure here, though Washington is supposed to do so in six months at an international conference on the issue in Kyoto, Japan. American officials say the European demands are ''unreasonable'' and do not reflect American conditions. Mr. Chirac, in his news conference, shrugged and said: ''Americans are major polluters. The average American is responsible for emitting three times the amount of greenhouse gas as the average Frenchman.'' But Mr. Chirac said that European unity had at least pushed the Americans to agree on 2010 for ''substantial reductions,'' if not yet on a percentage. On Bosnia, Mr. Clinton said he was pleased that the nations here agreed on pursuing all aspects of the Dayton accords, including the return of refugees, freedom of movement for all ethnic groups and the punishment of war criminals. They also agreed that aid to the parties should be conditional on their fulfillment of those promises. Mr. Clinton also repeated his position that the current military mission in Bosnia should be over in July 1998. European officials like Mr. Blair have said they believe that Bosnia will still require an international military presence after July 1998, but Clinton officials still say they ''fully expect'' that American soliders will leave then. The communique pleased the Americans by calling for a fairer reassessment of United Nations dues and supported Mr. Clinton's initiative to help African countries by opening markets and reducing duties. But the Europeans also insisted that market access and capitalism could not replace direct aid, and the French and Japanese agreed to work together on their own aid and investment initiative in Africa. Mr. Chirac said he was glad Washington was now thinking about Africa, while Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, speaking sarcastically, said he welcomed ''America's discovery of Africa.''

With Tony Blair, the new British Prime Minister, in the rhetorical vanguard, European heads of state  came before a gloom-and-doom conference of the world's nations today and demanded ever more forceful actions by the United States to confront environmental trends like global warming. One after another, as delegates reviewed how the world has fallen short of the ambitious environmental goals set by the United Nations five years ago, the leaders of the European Union repeated the message that they had delivered to the Clinton Administration in private meetings over the weekend: that they do not believe that the United States is being aggressive enough in seeking steep reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. This time their audience was dominated by leaders of the less developed countries. They are at the United Nations this week to assess progress, or the lack of it, since a United Nations conference in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 put the threat of global warming and other issues of environment and development at the top of the international agenda. With the poorer countries in mind, Japan, which like the United States is taking a cautious approach on reducing greenhouse gases, and Britain, which unlike the United States is calling for aggressive actions, both pledged substantial new commitments of aid to the developing world to help their economies grow without causing even more pollution from burning fossil fuels. And Germany, Brazil, South Africa and Singapore called for a new worldwide environmental organization to reinvigorate the United Nations' lackluster performance. Perhaps the warmest applause of the day came for Mr. Blair, who pledged Britain's willingness to do even more to reduce greenhouse gases than the rest of Europe has promised, and who bluntly, if indirectly, criticized the United States. Saying that ''some of the great industrialized nations'' have not achieved their past promises to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, Mr. Blair said Britain, which under a Conservative Government changed coal policies and kept its promises on carbon emissions, would do even more now that the Labor Party is at the helm.''Our targets will not be taken seriously by the poorer countries until the richer countries are meeting them,'' he said.''The biggest responsibility falls on those countries with the biggest emissions,'' he said, in an unmistakable reference to the United States. ''We in Europe have put our cards on the table. It is time for the special pleading to stop and for others to follow suit.''President Clinton is to address the gathering on Thursday, amid intense criticism from environmental advocates who say his Administration is not taking a firm enough stance in negotiations, scheduled to be concluded in December in Kyoto, Japan, aimed at setting binding targets for reducing greenhouse gases. But the Administration is under pressure in Congress to do nothing that would impose costs on powerful industries, or that would curtail the use of fossil fuels by wealthy countries but not poorer ones. And its negotiators have been making another argument: that it is simply impossible to meet the ambitious timetables proposed by the Europeans, who want to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases by 15 percent from the levels of 1990, and to do so by the year 2010. At Rio, industrial countries pledged to reduce emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000, but few countries have succeeded. Vice President Al Gore, who for years has called global warming one of the most serious threats facing the planet, welcomed the delegates with a brief call to ''roll up our sleeves and go to work'' on the undone business of Rio, but spoke only two sentences about the negotiations on global warming.''Kyoto presents a critical opportunity for the world to forge an agreement with binding emissions limits, flexibility in meeting those targets and the participation of all nations,'' he said. ''We must unite in our resolve to meet the challenge of climate change.''President Jacques Chirac of  France, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany and other European leaders echoed the complaint against the Americans for not proposing definite timetables and specific limits for reducing greenhouse gases. At a news conference, other members of Mr. Blair's Government muted somewhat the implied criticism of the White House.''I don't think we have a problem with the American Administration,'' said Robin Cook, Britain's Foreign Secretary. ''The American public have not come to terms with their energy consumption.''

Following is a transcript of President Clinton's address to the United Nations environmental conference yesterday, as provided by the Federal News Service, a private transcription company:Five years ago in Rio, the nations of the world joined together around a simple but revolutionary proposition: that today's progress must not come at tomorrow's expense. In our era, the environment has moved to the top of the international agenda because how well a nation honors it will have an impact, for good or ill, not only on the people of that nation, but all across the globe. Preserving the resources we share is crucial not only for the quality of our individual environments and health, but also to maintain stability and peace within nations and among them. As the father of conservation in our nation, John Muir, said, ''When we try to pick anything out by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe.''In the years since Rio there has been real progress in some areas. Nations have banned the dumping of radioactive wastes in the ocean and reduced marine pollution from sources on land. We're working to protect the precious coral reefs, to conserve threatened fish, to stop the advance of deserts. At the Cairo Conference on Population and Development, we reaffirmed the crucial importance of cooperative family planning efforts to long-term sustainable development. Here in America, we have worked to clean up a record number of our toxic dumps, and we intend to clean 500 more over the next four years. We've passed new laws to better protect our water, created new national parks and monuments, and worked to harmonize our efforts for environmental protection, economic growth, and social improvement, aided by a distinguished Council on Sustainable Development. Yesterday I announced the most far-reaching efforts to improve air quality in our nation in 20 years, cutting smog levels dramatically and, for the first time ever, setting standards to lower the levels of the fine particles in the atmosphere that form soot. In America, the incidence of childhood asthma has been increasing rapidly. It is now the single biggest reason our children are hospitalized. These measures will help to change that, to improve health of people of all ages, and to prevent as many as 15,000 premature deaths a year. Still, we here have much more to do, especially in reducing America's contribution to global climate change. The science is clear and compelling: We humans are changing the global climate. Concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are at their highest levels in more than 200,000 years and climbing sharply. If the trend does not change, scientists expect the seas to rise two feet or more over the next century. In America, that means 9,000 square miles of Florida, Louisiana and other coastal areas will be flooded; in Asia, 17 percent of Bangladesh, land on which six million people now live, will be lost; island chains such as the Maldives will disappear from the map unless we reverse the predictions. Climate changes will disrupt agriculture, cause severe droughts and floods and the spread of infectious diseases, which will be a big enough problem for us under the best of circumstances in the 21st century. There could be 50 million or more cases of malaria a year. We can expect more deaths from heat stress. Just two years ago here in the United States in the city of Chicago, we saw the tragedy of more than 400 of our citizens dying during a severe heat wave. No nation can escape this danger. None can evade its responsibility to confront it, and we must all do our part, industrial nations that emit the largest quantities of greenhouse gases today, and developing nations whose greenhouse gas emissions are growing rapidly. I applaud the European Union for its strong focus on this issue and the World Bank for setting environmental standards for projects it will finance in the developing world. Here in the United States, we must do better. With 4 percent of the world's population, we already produce more than 20 percent of its greenhouse gases. Frankly, our record since Rio is not sufficient. We have been blessed with high rates of growth and millions of new jobs over the last few years, but that has led to an increase in greenhouse-gas emissions in spite of the adoption of new conservation practices. So we must do better, and we will. The air-quality action I took on yesterday is a positive first step, but many more must follow. In order to reduce greenhouse gases and grow the economy, we must invest more in the technologies of the future. I am directing my Cabinet to work to develop them. Government, universities, business and labor must work together. All these efforts must be sustained over years, indeed, over decades. As Vice President Gore said Monday, ''Sustainable development requires sustained commitment.'' With that commitment, we can succeed. We must create new technologies and develop new strategies like emissions trading that will both curtail pollution and support continued economic growth. We owe that in the developed world to ourselves, and equally to those in the developing nations. Many of the technologies that will help us to meet the new air quality standards in America can also help address climate change. This is a challenge we must undertake immediately, and one in which I personally plan to play a critical role. In the United States, in order to do our part, we have to first convince the American people and the Congress that the climate change problem is real and imminent. I will convene a White House Conference on Climate Change later this year to lay the scientific facts before our people to understand that we must act, and to lay the economic facts there so that they will understand the benefits and the costs. With the best ideas and strategies, and new technologies and increased productivity and energy efficiency, we can turn the challenge to our advantage. We will work with our people, and we will bring to the Kyoto conference a strong American commitment to realistic and binding limits that will significantly reduce our emissions of greenhouse gases. I want to mention three other initiatives briefly that we are taking to deal with climate change and to advance sustainable development here and beyond our borders. First, to help developing nations reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the United States will provide a billion dollars in assistance over the next five years to support energy efficiency, develop alternative energy sources, and improve resource management to promote growth that does not have an adverse effect on the climate. Second, we will do more to encourage private investment to meet environmental standards. The Overseas Private Investment Corporation will now require that its projects adhere to new and strengthened environmental guidelines, just as our Export-Import Bank already does, and as I hope our allies and friends soon will. Common guidelines for responsible investment clearly would lead to more sustainable growth in developing nations. Third, we must increase our use of new technologies even as we move to develop more new technologies. Already we are working with our auto industry to produce cars by early in the next century that are three times as fuel efficient as today's vehicles. Now we will work with businesses and communities to use the sun's energy to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels by installing solar panels on one million more roofs around our nation by 2010. Capturing the sun's warmth can help us to turn down the Earth's temperature. Distinguished leaders, in all our cultures we have been taught from time immemorial that, as scripture says, ''One generation passes away and another comes, but the Earth abides forever.'' We must strengthen our stewardship of the environment to make that true, and to insure that when this generation passes, the young man who just spoke before me, and all of those of his generation, will inherit a rich and abundant Earth. CLINTON AT THE U.N.

President Clinton this week confronted the two most important environmental questions of the year, how to slow global warming and how to tighten the Clean Air Act. He satisfied the environmentalists in his constituency on the issue of smog and soot, but deeply disappointed many of them today on the question of climate change. It was a striking disparity, given that the two environmental problems have some important common roots. Soot and smog, like greenhouse gases, come mainly from burning fossil fuels. Imaginative new approaches to controlling both kinds of pollution are likely to involve plans for trading emissions credits and perfecting new technologies. But there are important differences, and these illustrate why the President found himself seeming so torn on the overall question of what to do about air pollution. For one thing, many ordinary people have immediate concerns about the smog they breathe and the way it and particles in the air can worsen the illnesses of their young children and aging parents. Not so many are worried about rising sea levels caused by melting glaciers, or about the scientific subtleties of global warming. For another thing, President Clinton faced a pressing deadline for deciding on the new air pollution rules, which under a court order had to be issued by July. His ultimate decisions about how fast to move on global warming are not due until December, when international negotiations sponsored by the United Nations culminate in Kyoto, Japan. And above all, fixing the global warming problem requires not just more powerful medicine, but a lot more of it, than controlling local smokestacks and tailpipes. To satisfy the critics demanding swift and decisive action from the United States to head off global warming, Mr. Clinton would have to pledge that a nation in the midst of an energy binge was about to break its addiction to cheap fossil fuels. And that implies an act of extraordinary political will. At the United Nations today, Mr. Clinton promised to mobilize his own country in such an effort, but he disappointed anybody who wanted a precise plan. In the President's own crucial word, any goals he will eventually accept must be ''realistic.''The industry giants who lambasted the Administration for its decision on air quality on Wednesday praised Mr. Clinton's caution on global warming today.''We are encouraged by the fact that President Clinton seems to be taking a slightly more cautious approach to climate issues than he appeared to be taking several months ago,'' said Gail McDonald, president of the Global Climate Coalition, an industry group. ''There are many vested interests pushing very hard for an agreement that would have dire consequences for the economy.''Several policies favored by many environmentalists are seen by the Administration as unrealistic. Energy taxes as a way to lower fuel consumption are pretty well ruled out in Washington's current political climate. Regulations to enforce fuel-efficiency on automakers are equally out of favor. Federico Pena, Mr. Clinton's Energy Secretary, said in an interview today that the most important thing in the President's speech was his commitment to proselytizing the public on the urgency of the problem and then to persuading the country that the solution will not be unduly painful.''We have not done a good job of educating the American people, first about the challenges we face on global warming, and secondly about the value of making the long-term investments that actually pay back in your pocketbook,'' he said. It is impossible to say, of course, whether technology breakthroughs of the kind Mr. Clinton vowed to pursue are the most realistic way of weaning America from coal and oil. Despite the progress toward wider use of photovoltaic solar cells, electric cars, fuel cells that run on hydrogen, and so on, the technical hurdles are still formidable.''Solar energy is an important part of the long-term solution, but it is no substitute for binding targets and timetables for reducing emissions soon,'' said Michael Oppenheimer, chief scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund. America is, after all, a nation where energy waste is common enough that many readily available conservation measures could pay for themselves by reducing the energy costs of businesses and households. Still, market mechanisms do not yet exist to drive investments in those directions, at least not at the speed needed to dramatically slow emissions of carbon dioxide, the principal greenhouse gas. The Administration is working hard to develop an approach toward holding down emissions that will create pollution permits that companies can buy and sell to each other. Known as the ''cap and trade'' approach, it is intended to steer investments in pollution control toward the cheapest possible solutions. It pleases some environmental groups, but others view it with the suspicion of a grandmother confronted with a newfangled gadget. But the White House appears to be persuaded by its own economists that the economic pain of abruptly taking new paths on energy consumption might be too great to bear, and that a more moderate approach is called for. Such conclusions are amplified in dire warnings from powerful industries about the dangers of moving too quickly. Fed by an economic boom that has overwhelmed steady improvements in industrial energy efficiency, its gas-guzzling vehicles slaked by affordable gasoline, the United States appears likely to increase emissions of carbon dioxide by 13 percent in this decade. This is just the reverse of what it promised to do five years ago in Rio de Janeiro, where the industrial countries aimed to reduce greenhouse gas output to the level of 1990 by the year 2000. As Mr. Clinton said in his speech, only 1 out of every 25 people on the planet is an American, but the fuel they burn produces one out of every five tons of the carbon dioxide that is steadily building up in the atmosphere, threatening to seriously disrupt the climate 100 or 200 years from now. To be sure, some countries have met their targets and others are willing to promise to obey a new, binding treaty that would actually reduce greenhouse gases further. The target the European Union proposes is to cut emissions by 15 percent from the 1990 level, achieving that goal by the year 2010. The British cut emissions when they ended subsidies for an inefficient coal industry. The Germans, after unification, tore down the obsolete state-run factories of the east. Russia met the target of reducing emissions, but only because its economy collapsed along with Communism. And as a whole, Europe does not have the aversion to energy taxes -- or taxes in general -- that has been displayed in the United States, where the Clinton Administration's first big economic policy defeat was on the BTU tax, and where just last year Congress, egged on by Bob Dole, was busily trying to roll back gas taxes because of a blip in prices at the pump. CLINTON AT THE U.N.: AN ASSESSMENT

President Clinton told a special session of the United Nations tonight that if countries ignore the ''real and imminent'' problem of global warming, the earth risks severe drought, floods and the spread of infectious disease. But, speaking a day after he sharply tightened pollution limits on soot and smog, Mr. Clinton stopped well short of the commitment to cutting greenhouse gases that allies have been urging. He deferred announcing any such restrictions -- which are  opposed by automobile and oil companies and other heavy industries --  until an international meeting in December in Kyoto, Japan. Mr. Clinton went further tonight than he has before in endorsing scientific findings establishing the dangers of pollution.''The science is clear and compelling: We humans are changing the global climate,'' he said. ''Concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are at their highest levels in more than 200,000 years and climbing sharply.'' $( Transcript, page A11.$) Mr. Clinton's speech fit the tone of the conference, which has been attended this week by the heads of state of about 70 nations. The debate over the environment here has been marked by talk of crisis, bitter criticism of international foot-dragging and apocalyptic visions of a stricken planet. Warning that unless changes are made, scientists expect the seas to rise by two feet or more in the next century, Mr. Clinton envisioned an America in which ''9,000 square miles of Florida, Louisiana, and other coastal areas will be flooded.'' He spoke of an increase of 50 million or more malaria cases worldwide each year.''No nation can escape this danger,'' he said. ''None can evade its responsibility to confront it.'' Mr. Clinton noted that with 4 percent of the world's population, the United States emits 20 percent of its greenhouse gases, which are defined as carbon dioxide emissions generated by anything that burns fossil fuels like oil and coal. ''Here in the United States, we must do better,'' he said. But just last weekend at an annual summit meeting of industrialized nations held in Denver, Mr. Clinton fended off demands from the French and Germans that he move immediately to restrict greenhouse emissions. Privately, his aides said the Europeans were more interested in posturing for their voters back home than in setting immediate and strict goals that could also prove difficult for them to meet. Further, Mr. Clinton faces less pressure domestically on the issue of greenhouse gases than he did over soot and smog. While heat waves, like the one in Chicago that was blamed for more than 400 deaths two years ago, have periodically drawn public attention to the issue of global warming, on a daily basis, parents ferrying their children to baseball practice are more likely to fret about the smog. Today, the President said he would take action on greenhouse gases later this year. He said he would ''work with our people and we will bring to the Kyoto conference a strong American commitment to realistic and binding limits that will significantly reduce our emissions of greenhouse gases.''Within the Administration, Vice President Al Gore has been the house goad over the dangers of greenhouse gases. He is fond of unveiling a chart whose right side unfolds repeatedly upward to display a dramatic red spike depicting the recent global increase in carbon dioxide. Support from environmentalists --  who were delighted by the Administration's moves against pollution on Wednesday but disappointed tonight -- is considered a key to Mr. Gore's probable Presidential bid. But it is an open question how far the Administration can afford to push energy and auto companies, and the union workers who depend on them. Fred Krupp, head of the Environmental Defense Fund, said President Clinton's failure to set specific timetables for reduction of greenhouse gases made ''instant Pablum'' out of his speech, despite the promises of foreign aid and advanced research aimed at controlling climate change. But Richard Mott, vice president of the World Wildlife Fund, called the speech ''the strongest statement on climate change by any sitting U.S. President, by a wide margin.'' He said it was very significant that Mr. Clinton had endorsed the scientific consensus that the problem is serious, and had pledged to educate the public and persuade the Congress to address it. Mr. Clinton promised some modest steps tonight to begin tackling the problem of climate change -- two of them intended to modify the practices of foreign countries, rather than of the United States. He promised $1 billion in assistance, already proposed in his budget plan, to help third-world nations manage their resources and develop alternative energy sources. He also said the United States would require that certain projects it helps finance overseas meet new environmental standards. Lastly, he said the United States would try to increase its own use of  more environmentally friendly technologies, including solar energy. In keeping with rules at the conference, most speeches have lasted about seven minutes. Mr. Clinton spoke for 12 minutes. He wrestled with the wording of his remarks all afternoon after attending the burial of a great-uncle in Hope, Ark. Bill Richardson, United States representative to the United Nations, said Mr. Clinton's decision on Wednesday to tighten pollution restrictions had helped allay other nations' doubts about the Administration, proving it was ''serious about the environment.''Asked why the President decided not to move immediately on the issue of greenhouse gases as well, Mr. Richardson said, ''We've got to build support with the Congress and the American people first,'' adding, ''I think there'll be a good basis to move aggressively in Kyoto.''Mr. Clinton said he needed to generate more support before trying to cut greenhouse emissions. To do so, he said, he will hold a White House conference on climate change later this year, ''to lay the scientific facts before our people, to understand that we must act, and to lay the economic facts there so that they understand the benefits and the costs.''Mr. Clinton intended his appearance at the United Nations tonight to  raise his profile on environmental issuesdramatically. He had announced his intention to attend during a speech in a Costa Rican rain forest on May 9. In that speech, he issued a more hedged warning about the dangers of climate change.''There is some doubt about what increased greenhouse gas emissions are doing to the climate,'' Mr. Clinton said then, ''but no one doubts that they're changing the climate, and no one doubts that the potential consequences can be very profound and severe.''The special session of the General Assembly was called to assess what progress has been made toward solving global environmental problems since the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro five years ago. When the conference ends on Friday night, representatives of 199 countries and international organizations will have spoken, including 42 heads of state or government, a couple of princes and dozens of ministers. There was little expectation that the conference would break any new ground or reach any new agreements. The highlight of the week was the unexpectedly strong language used by Europeans in urging the United States to take a leadership role in solving environmental problems. Britain's Foreign Secretary, Robin Cook, said on Monday that this meant the American people as well as the Clinton Administration. Nations from the third world wanted promises of more aid to help alleviate pollution and other problems. Except for offers of some assistance from Japan and the United States, no such pledges materialized. CLINTON AT THE U.N.: THE OVERVIEW

A week after government leaders from around the world trooped in by the dozens to assess the global environment five years after the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, the international conference they addressed ground to a quiet close today in an atmosphere tinged with gloom. While nonstop speeches went on in the hall of the General Assembly, committees of nations bickered for days but were unable to agree on concrete proposals in three critical areas: cutting emissions to head off global warming, protecting forests and increasing aid to poor nations who are ruining their environments through uncontrolled development. In all of these areas, many nations had been looking to the United States for leadership, another demonstration of the enormous power Washington has in the United Nations, even though Washington has been the target of criticism for failing to pay its dues. When President Clinton, in his speech on Thursday, backed away from setting numerical targets for American emissions reductions as Europeans had asked, the initial response was critical, since diplomats realized that there would probably be no decision from Washington until very close to a conference in Koyto, Japan, in December, the deadline for an international agreement. This will give little time to negotiate acceptable levels of emissions reductions with developing countries, some of which are already reluctant to agree to any controls if someone else does not pay for the cost of environmental improvements. In coming decades, large developing countries like India and China will be major emitters of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane.''With less than six months to go to Kyoto, we still haven't heard any near-term specifics from the Clinton Administration,'' Howard Ris, executive director of the Union of Concerned Scientists, said after Mr. Clinton's speech. ''We need to tackle global warming now, not tomorrow.''But today, diplomats and a number of environmental groups found silver linings in the President's speech, welcoming his statements that recognized the danger of global warming and the role that human activity -- most of all in the United States -- plays in creating and worsening the problem. Many also welcomed the President's pledge to inform the American people why the issue of greenhouse gases was important. American public opinion played a significant part in building up the international awareness of environmental issues a decade ago, and partly drove the momentum that made the Earth Summit in Rio a success in 1992. It became apparent today that it was not only the United States and other industrial nations that stalled agreements on major issues. At a news conference marking the end of the meeting the United Nations calls ''Earth Summit + 5,'' Razali Ismail, president of the General Assembly and Malaysia's United Nations representative, said that both rich and poor nations had shown a lack of political will to force more than convoluted compromises. The conference produced a closing document that took small steps in areas of freshwater conservation, forest use and the financing of environmentally sustainable development, including the need to look at harmful government subsidies. But a separate statement of commitment to action on the environment was scrapped because countries could not agree on the wording. Mr. Razali, who was a major player in the Rio conference in 1992, said that not only were indicators of environmental destruction worse this year, but also the spirit of Rio was gone.''We reached the zenith of our enthusiasm and commitment for sustainable development and the environment in 1992,'' he said. ''Since then many other things have come our way which have distracted our attention from that. Since then a sense of parochialism has spread over much of the developed world, a parochialism that affected the willingness of those countries to make available funds or resources, all kinds of things, technology transfer.''''This special session should go down as a very honest attempt to try to make an appraisal of the results, and of how far we have gone from Rio,'' he said. ''There was very little attempt to try to sweep things under the carpet or put a gloss over something that's not there.''Speaking at a separate news conference today, Barbara J. Bramble, director of the international office of the National Wildlife Federation in Washington, said that this had been a week of ''standstill'' in areas environmental groups had expected action.''All is not lost,'' she said. ''There's an awful lot of language that shows slow bits of progress. But that is a total disconnect in time scale between what is being done and what is really needed.''

There was no way that President Clinton could satisfy everyone in his address last week to the United Nations on climate change, and he did not. By embracing the scientific community's assessment that global warming is a real threat with potentially appalling consequences, he annoyed powerful industries who have been challenging that science because they will bear many of the costs of dealing with the problem. By refusing to embrace a specific timetable for reducing the greenhouse gases that help cause global warming, he disappointed many environmentalists who had hoped for a less ambiguous commitment and faster action. But none of that should have been surprising. What was surprising was the impressive challenge Bill Clinton set for himself. The U.N. session was merely the first in a series of international meetings that will culminate in Kyoto, Japan, in December, where both industrialized and developing nations are expected to sign a treaty binding them to a detailed plan of action. In the interim, Mr. Clinton says he will try to educate the American people about the nature of the problem and give them some straight talk about the costs they will bear and the sacrifices they will have to make. Without such a campaign, he implied, he cannot possibly sell Congress on a program that would impose real costs on individuals and on major producers and users of fossil fuels like the big utilities, the oil companies and the automobile and petrochemical industries. This will be a huge task, and the most important question, now and after Kyoto, is whether Mr. Clinton is up to it. He must first educate a country that is in the midst of an energy binge to the idea that it will have to break its addiction to the fossil fuels that cause greenhouse gases and, meanwhile, invest heavily in new technologies. He must then sell those same ideas to a Congress that is already complaining that the more modest measures he announced last week to attack ground-level smog and soot are too expensive. Mr. Clinton has other tricky tasks that extend beyond America's borders. He and his negotiators must join with the industrialized nations on a plan to spread the costs fairly among nations, as well as a scheme to bring the developing countries into the effort. Some climate experts believe that the developing countries deserve more time to build their economies with even greater use of fossil fuels, as the industrialized countries have done for 150 years. Others believe they should be assigned specific emissions limits right away. What everyone agrees on is that without the participation of big polluters like China and India, any scheme to limit greenhouse gases will be a farce. Mr. Clinton has asked for six months to do all this. The measure of his success will be whether he has a credible plan ready in time for Kyoto.

After five years of worrying that the Clinton Administration might tighten air quality regulations, the auto industry's fears have finally come true. President Clinton approved more stringent metropolitan air quality standards on Wednesday. A day later, in a more serious blow to the auto industry, the President declared that at an international conference next December in Kyoto, Japan, the United States would favor the adoption of binding limits on so-called greenhouse gases, which may contribute to global warming. Auto industry officials had been fretting about both issues for months, and they have already begun lobbying Congress to block both Administration initiatives. International carbon dioxide limits are an unnecessarily drastic response to a global warming threat that has not yet been proved to exist, said Andrew H. Card Jr., president of the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, a Washington trade group representing Detroit's Big Three. The metropolitan air quality rules, he said, ''are ill-conceived, economically disadvantageous to the country and will put a particular burden on the auto industry and the people of Michigan.''Controls on the emissions of carbon dioxide, one of the greenhouse gases, represent a potentially dire threat to auto makers. Carbon dioxide is produced in large quantities when gasoline is burned in an internal combustion engine. Reducing carbon dioxide emissions means improving fuel economy or reducing the number of cars on the road. Detroit auto makers in particular are already struggling to meet existing fuel economy standards as they sell ever more Jeeps and other gas-guzzling sport utility vehicles. Tighter standards could severely crimp profits. Auto industry executives have been downright caustic in recent speeches about the possibility of carbon dioxide limits. ''This sort of fuzzy thinking provides the warm illusion of saving the sky, which we're not even sure needs saving, but it won't have any impact at all on global warming,'' said Robert J. Eaton, the chairman and chief executive of the Chrysler Corporation. ''It will just move jobs to those countries which are allowed to spew whatever they want into the air.''President Clinton chose on Thursday not to impose immediate carbon dioxide limits, but auto executives had never expected that he would do so and were not impressed. The main goal of industry lobbying has been to make sure that any carbon dioxide limits negotiated in Kyoto were voluntary, not binding. Detroit executives are convinced that only the United States would actually obey binding limits while other countries would flout them. Auto makers have tried to market vehicles that can burn natural gas or alcohol or run on electric power from batteries. But demand has been remarkably weak, with Federal, state and local agencies often ignoring laws designed to force them to buy alternative-fuel vehicles. Ford, the main producer of such vehicles, announced on Friday that it would broaden its lineup to 11 models this autumn, including several that burn ethanol, a type of alcohol. Yet Ford had combined sales of just 8,461 alternative-fuel vehicles across five model lines last year. Behind the dismay in Detroit about the latest Administration moves lies a very real worry at General Motors, Ford and Chrysler that they will be put at a competitive disadvantage,  against their foreign-company rivals. Ford and particularly Chrysler already produce more sport utility vehicles, mini-vans and pickup trucks than cars. But cars tend to be much more fuel-efficient and therefore produce less carbon dioxide. G.M. will be producing more so-called light trucks than cars within several years, while most foreign auto makers overwhelmingly make cars and will continue doing so. The metropolitan air quality standards could also hurt Detroit's Big Three. While the Big Three still have many of their factories in big Midwestern cities with pollution problems, Japanese and European auto makers have chosen to build their newer assembly plants in small Southern towns. Though these choices of factory sites were mainly aimed at forestalling unionization, the sites also tend to have clean air that is likely to meet the more stringent standards without any extra spending by the foreign auto makers.

INTERNATIONAL3-15Big Contractors Push For Expansion of NATO  Military contractors are acting like globe-hopping diplomats to encourage the expansion of NATO, which will create a huge market for them. Admission to the Western fraternity will bring political prestige, but at a price: playing by rules that require Western weapons and equipment. The potential market for fighter jets alone is put at $10 billion.1Britain's Shadow on Hong Kong  Hong Kong survived as a colony much longer than Britain's other outposts, perhaps because the lease determined when independence would come. As it does, people are assessing and disputing the British legacy, and how it relates to the lively success of the Chinese residents.1Georgia Limiting Adoptions  In the former Soviet state of Georgia, foreigners trying to adopt children are facing an impasse that tells much about a growing antipathy of the local people to the adoptions.1A Cornerstone for Vietnam  Secretary of State Albright laid the cornerstone of an American consulate in Ho Chi Minh City, once Saigon, expressing the hope that both nations are moving ''from tragic conflict to mutual respect.''8Arrest in Japanese Beheading  Japanese police arrested a 14-year-old boy in the beheading of an 11-year-old last month, the grisliest slaying in memory in Japan. The arrest of a juvenile, who knew the victim, stunned the Japanese.6Albanians Vote, With Fear  Disillusioned and anxious, Albanians vote Sunday in a parliamentary election that is expected to be marked by violence and fraud.3NATIONAL16-21Tougher Standards For U.S. Car Makers  President Clinton's approval on Wednesday of stricter air quality standards for the nation's cities was a fear come true for the automobile industry. A day later, the President delivered an even more serious blow to the industry when he declared that at an international conference next December in Kyoto, Japan, the United States would favor the adoption of binding limits on so-called greenhouse gases, which may contribute to global warming.18G.A.O. Will Release Report  Over objections by the Pentagon, the General Accounting Office plans to release a report on Monday that says the Defense Department and arms manufacturers exaggerated the success of high-technology weapons that were used in the 1991 gulf war.20Protein Linked to Illness  Lesions made of a previously unidentified protein have been found in the brains of Alzheimer's patients, a discovery that could shed light on the cause of the disease and offer a means of early diagnosis and perhaps even treatment.21Computer Bandit Faces Jail  Kevin Mitnick, the computer outlaw who was trapped by another computer whiz in 1995, was sentenced in Los Angeles on Friday to nearly two years in prison. Mr. Mitnick, who pleaded guilty last year to using 15 stolen cellular phone numbers to dial into computer databases in North Carolina, is awaiting trial in California on 25 counts of computer and wire fraud, possessing unlawful access devices, damaging computers and intercepting electronic messages. (AP)NEW YORK23-28Inside Story Emerges After Tumultuous Rent War  The fight over rent regulations in New York began when Joseph L. Bruno, the majority leader of the New York State Senate and a Republican, called for the end of the system in two years. What followed, by most accounts, was a series of missteps by the Republicans. Most of all, Mr. Bruno and Governor Pataki misread the monumental importance of rent protections to New York City residents, regardless of party affiliation, and failed to anticipate how hard they would fight to maintain laws that many had come to regard as a middle-class entitlement.1Committing Sex Offenders  A new legislative assault on pedophiles and rapists goes beyond ''Megan's Laws'': This one is intended to keep the most dangerous of them from getting back on the streets in the first place. A handful of states have enacted laws giving officials the power to commit violent sex offenders to mental hospitals once their prison terms are up. In the last few years, more than 250 sex offenders have been committed, and the trend is expected to spread across the country with the Supreme Court decision last week upholding Kansas' Sexually Violent Predator Act.1OBITUARIES29Kenneth Dale McCormick  Doubleday's longtime editor in chief and a major figure in American book publishing was 91.29Weather30Television38Styles31Weddings34-38

After tinkering with computer models for more than a year, the Clinton Administration predicted today that measures to combat the growth of global warming by limiting the emissions of  carbon dioxide and other gases that trap heat from the sun would have a far less dramatic effect on the economy than had been projected by industries opposed to restraints on energy use. The Administration's analysis opens what is expected to be a long campaign between now and the end of the year, when international negotiations are scheduled to conclude in Kyoto, Japan, to build support for a proposed binding treaty to limit the emissions of those kinds of gases. Any measures to reverse the steady growth in such emissions, mostly given off by burning fossil fuels to operate cars and generate electricity and heat, would probably involve the biggest Federal intervention in energy markets since oil-exporting countries raised oil prices substantially in the 1970's. But the Administration's computer models suggested that the economic side effects would be only half as severe as those projected in a recent study by economists at Charles River Associates for the American Petroleum Institute, a lobbying group for fuel producers. Critics who say the Administration is moving too fast on global warming have warned that mines and factories would close, inflation would rise and productivity would fall. But another school of thought holds that energy conservation can pay for itself and that new technologies can be found, offering major economic gains, not to mention the benefits of limiting global warming and its potentially serious effects. As the Administration tries to decide how fast and how far to cut those gas emissions, the question of the treaty's economic effect is being asked with increasing urgency in Congress, which has ultimate authority over the country's energy policy. In addition, any treaty would have to be submitted to the Senate for ratification. In a staff paper released today, the White House said tough action on such gas emissions might, over the next few decades, shave a fraction of a percent from the nation's economic growth, followed by a recovery -- or might, if implemented cleverly, have a barely discernible effect or even a net economic benefit.''It just boils down to this,'' Janet Yellen, chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, said at a hearing of the House Commerce committee. ''If we do it dumb, it could cost a lot, but if we do it smart, it will cost much less, and indeed could produce net benefits in the long run.''Ms. Yellen's comments were met with skepticism from both the ranking Republican and Democrat on the committee, and by many junior members of the panel as well.''Unfortunately, in the area of global climate change, the Administration has not yet presented a persuasive case,'' said Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr., the Virginia Republican who heads the chairman. Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, treated Ms. Yellen and Timothy Wirth, the Undersecretary of State for Global Affairs, to a sometimes blistering questioning. Mr. Dingell, whose district is a prime manufacturer of automobiles, said the analysis suggested ''huge economic constraints'' on American businesses. According to the Administration's projections, Mr. Dingell said, stabilizing emissions at their 1990 levels by 2010 would require steps equivalent to charging about $100 for every ton of carbon emitted when a fossil fuel is burned. That would be like raising the tax on gasoline of about 26 cents a gallon, a tax on electricity of 2 cents per kilowatt hour, a tax on coal of $52.52 per ton, and a tax on natural gas of $1.49 per thousand cubic feet. But, Administration officials said, the projections are put in terms of taxes merely because that is the easiest way for economists to model things that are even more complex than the tax code. Nobody seriously expects the White House to propose a big increase in the gasoline tax. The White House supports a treaty that would bind the United States and other developed countries to significant reductions in emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases, leaving each country to decide how it wanted to do so.

The Senate unanimously urged the Clinton Administration today not to pursue a treaty that would limit the industrial world's emissions of greenhouse gases unless the agreement requires developing countries to control their rapidly growing emissions at the same time. While it is not binding, the Senate resolution complicates the continuing negotiations for a new treaty to prevent global warming caused by increasing levels of carbon dioxide as people burn more fossil fuel. The Senate would have to consent by a two-thirds vote to the ratification of any such treaty by the United States. The resolution criticizing the Administration's current negotiating approach passed, 95 to 0. In the debate, many senators expressed skepticism that global warming was a serious problem or that the United States, as the leading emitter of gases like carbon dioxide that trap heat from the sun, should do more than poorer nations to reverse it. But even those senators who favor a treaty voted for the resolution after its chief sponsor, Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, expressly endorsed the scientific consensus behind the global warming theory and signaled that less developed countries ought to be granted more flexibility in cutting emissions, as long as they accept the treaty commitments. The final negotiations for the treaty are to be made at a meeting in Kyoto, Japan, at the end of the year. The next round of bargaining is to begin next week in Bonn. The resolution that passed the Senate today disputes a basic premise of those talks: that the first and biggest steps ought to be taken by industrial nations like the United States. Senator Byrd, a Democrat, said the proposal offered by the Administration in the talks was ''simply unacceptable.'' That proposal would set binding limits on emissions of heat-trapping gases by industrial nations in the medium term, while deferring the time when developing nations would have to accept similar limits. Mr. Byrd's resolution is supported by energy producing and consuming industries, especially the coal industry, which sustains the West Virginia economy and is powerful in many other states. Industry lobbyists have argued that reducing such gases threatens their prosperity. Andrew Card, president of the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, called the vote ''a wake-up call to the Administration to adopt a more open and realistic approach to global climate negotiations.''But Tim Wirth, the Under Secretary of State for global environmental affairs, tried to put the best light on the situation, saying after the vote that ''we support the thrust of the Byrd resolution,'' and added: ''We have been further out front than any country in pressing for developing-country commitments. The U.S. is much more aggressive than anyone else, and this strengthens our hand.''Senators John Kerry of Massachusetts, a Democrat, and John H. Chafee of Rhode Island, a Republican, joined with Mr. Byrd in a carefully scripted colloquy on the floor during which they all seemed to agree that each country should make, as Senator Byrd put it, ''unique and binding contributions of a pace and kind consistent with their industrialization.''Mr. Byrd added, ''The developing world must agree in Kyoto to adopt some manner of binding targets and commitments which would begin during the same compliance period as the developed world, in as aggressive and effective a schedule as possible.''A scripted discussion in a Senate debate is important because it provides a legislative history intended to clarify the intention of a resolution. Mr. Byrd also said his resolution ''accepts the thesis, which is still the subject of some dispute,'' that global warming is a real problem. Many scientists believe the warming of the planet could cause ocean levels to rise and would severely disrupt the earth's biological systems. Such a trend is likely, they say, because increasing levels of carbon dioxide and other gases trap heat from the sun in a process similar to what happens in a greenhouse. In the colloquy, Mr. Kerry built support for the Administration's plan to allow developing and developed nations to trade credits with one another for reducing emissions, a plan intended to reduce the costs faced by industrial nations while decreasing the pollution generated by developing nations. But the debate also highlighted strong feelings among some lawmakers against any treaty whatsoever. Senator Larry E. Craig, Republican of Idaho, accused President Clinton of using his ''bully pulpit to terrorize the American people,'' and of ''building a propaganda campaign'' to support a new treaty.

Early in this decade, as the nations of the world negotiated a treaty to head off man-made global warming, industry lobbyists spoke with virtually one voice on the issue of climate change. They just said no -- no to any binding agreement obligating countries to control emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, and no to the very idea that there was serious cause for concern. But times have changed, and the industry stance has changed as well. Though hard-liners still see no need to force anyone to limit emissions of greenhouse gases, a whole new spectrum of industry voices has joined the policy debate as businesses have examined more closely how they might win or lose. At least one big crack has developed in the once-monolithic front presented by the producers of fossil fuels, like coal and oil, the very people who might be expected to hold out most strongly against any change. At meetings here, where delegates from around the globe have gathered  under the five-year-old treaty, these changes have surfaced as a more widespread willingness to accept the view of mainstream scientists that the problem is real and to take at least some action to solve it. The heads of several large corporations met with President Clinton in Washington today to discuss the problem. The President has promised a strong American proposal for specific levels of greenhouse gas reductions that is still being drawn up. In what may be the most telling change, British Petroleum, the world's third-largest oil company, broke ranks with other fossil fuel producers recently and announced that it believes that there is now enough scientific evidence to warrant concern about whether human activity -- primarily the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas -- is changing Earth's climate. The time to contemplate action ''is not when the link between greenhouse gases and climate change is conclusively proven, but when the possibility cannot be discounted and is taken seriously,'' John Browne, the company's chairman, said in a recent speech. British Petroleum, he said, ''has reached that point.''Delegates to the meeting here are negotiating reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases. The most important of these is carbon dioxide, which is produced by burning fossil fuels. The negotiations will conclude in Kyoto, Japan, in December. In the conference rooms, corridors and coffee bars of the Bonn Maritim Hotel, where the talks are taking place, the spectrum of industry opinion runs from hard-liners in the coal and oil industries who want no agreement in Kyoto to companies that produce alternatives to fossil fuels and want strong action immediately. In the middle is a broad group with a range of positions. The dominant scientific view is that greenhouse gas emissions are probably responsible for at least part of a rise of 1 degree Fahrenheit in the average global temperature over the last century. Mainstream scientists predict that if emissions are not reduced, there will be a further rise of perhaps 3.5 degrees in the next century and more after that, with accompanying disruptions in climate. These include, for instance, more frequent and severe floods and droughts and a rise in the sea level. By comparison, the world has warmed by 5 to 9 degrees since the last ice age. There is considerable uncertainty in these estimates. Nevertheless, Mr. Browne said in a telephone interview, ''it seems to us it's time we should do something'' about greenhouse gas emissions. ''Just because there are uncertainties,'' he said, ''it doesn't mean you just stand still and do nothing.''In that spirit, the company is formally collaborating with the Environmental Defense Fund, a private group, to test practical, market-based approaches to emission reduction. It is taking steps to control its own emissions and to develop alternative fuels and energy technologies. It is undertaking cooperative efforts to reduce emissions in developing countries. And it has assumed the rotating leadership of a broad Washington-based coalition of industry moderates on climate, many of them multinational companies. The Clinton Administration is looking to the moderates for support as part of a campaign to win public acceptance of Mr. Clinton's pledge at the United Nations in June to seek strong action in Kyoto. Mr. Browne was one of the chief executives who discussed the subject with the President today. Mr. Clinton's United Nations speech appears to have infused the climate debate with new zest -- and to have increased the lobbying from all points on the industry spectrum.''The status of industry has dramatically changed,'' said Dan Esty, who directs the Yale University Center for Environmental Law and Policy, alluding to the period since the climate treaty was negotiated in 1992, when he was a member of the American negotiating team. ''There was only one position in '92; today there is a flowering of industry positions.'' And back then, he said, ''you didn't have a major industrial powerhouse like B.P. coming in and saying the time for action is now.''As views have proliferated, so have industry lobbyists. Connie Holmes, a lobbyist for the National Mining Association who opposes any but voluntary action to reduce greenhouse gases, said that when she began lobbying in 1988, there were ''maybe three or four people'' from industry doing the same. Here in Bonn, there are scores. Mrs. Holmes acknowledges that they consist of ''a much broader range of people, a wide spectrum of opinion.''The shift in outlook should not be overstated, though. Mr. Browne, for instance, does not see climate change as a crisis and argues that there is time to head off the problem in a deliberate, step-by-step fashion that balances economic growth and environmental protection. Any targets and timetables for emission reduction, he says, should be realistic and achievable. Further, industry is virtually unanimous in insisting that developing countries share in emission reductions. Otherwise, it fears, companies in industrialized countries will be at a competitive disadvantage. As of now, the richer countries are obligated under the treaty and subsequent international policy decisions to take the first steps. Developing countries say those first steps have not been taken, since most of the richer countries have not even been able to fulfill a voluntary pledge under the treaty to stabilize emissions at 1990 levels. Most companies and industry groups do not go as far in the direction of strong action as does an American organization called the Business Council for Sustainable Energy. Its members include several utilities -- whose leaders have found it in their interest to promote energy conservation, which reduces fossil-fuel burning and greenhouse gas emissions -- as well producers of solar power, wind power and natural gas. The last, while it is a fossil fuel, is viewed as a preferred alternative in the near term because it produces less carbon dioxide than coal or oil. This group as a whole stands to benefit from controls on greenhouse emissions since its members put a premium on the more efficient use of energy. Michael Marvin, the group's executive director. said ''we've got the technology right now'' to produce energy more efficiently. Not surprisingly, his organization favors an early stabilization of greenhouse gas emissions, by 2005, followed by progressive reductions beginning in 2010. A larger group, the Washington-based International Climate Change Partnership, now under the chairmanship of British Petroleum and including a wide range of industries, accepts the existence of a scientific consensus that some measure of man-made global warming is likely. ''We think that appears to be relatively strong,'' said Kevin J. Fay, the group's executive director. But, he said, climate change is a highly complex, long-term problem that need not necessarily be attacked with immediate targets and timetables for emission reductions. The Kyoto deadline is an artificial one, he said, adding that it is more important to achieve a lasting solution that allows both environmental protection and economic growth rather than a quick ''feel good'' result. There are probably many pathways by which the objective of heading off dangerous climatic change can be achieved, he said. Still another group, consisting of electric utilities and represented by the Edison Electric Institute, is collaborating with the Administration to reduce greenhouse emissions by promoting more efficient use of electricity. This program, the institute says, has already brought significant reductions. All of this is voluntary, and the group favors that approach in any Kyoto agreement. It also is determined to get credit for reductions already achieved as part of such an agreement. The hard-liners have not changed their position. Several of them are to be found in the Global Climate Coalition, a Washington-based lobbying group representing core energy and manufacturing industries. Gail McDonald, the new president of the coalition, formed zeros with her fingers when asked what her group would like to see happen in Kyoto. The coalition continues to question the science of global warming. It argues that the impact of climate change is too uncertain and that the risk of economic damage is still too high to justify stronger, mandatory action. The Administration's present course toward mandatory targets and timetables is ''an unjustified rush to judgment,'' the coalition's chairman, William F. O'Keefe, told Congress recently. He likened it to driving too fast in a thick fog. This, he said, ''risks a fatal crash.''

Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference today on the South Lawn of the White House, from a transcript provided by the Federal News Service, a private transcription company:OPENING REMARKSBefore I begin, let me first say that I join with all Americans in expressing our deepest condolences for the victims of the terrible plane crash yesterday in Guam. I have spoken with Governor Gutierrez, and I want to commend him, the hundreds of volunteers, and the United States military personnel who are working so hard on the response and the rescue effort. The National Transportation Safety Board will lead the investigation of the crash with technical assistance from the F.A.A. and other agencies as needed. Now, today I want to briefly review what our nation has accomplished during the first seven months of this year, and to spell out the opportunities and the obligations that we have to continue that progress. As I have said over and over again, our common mission must be to prepare our people for the 21st century, to master the challenges and seize the opportunities of this remarkable time. I believe the American people are coming to see that and coming to believe that as we pass through this period of remarkable change, the future holds far greater rewards than risks if our people, our government, and our other institutions are ready for tomorrow. In these past months, we have seen how the politics of the vital center can work to make progress on many of our most difficult problems. We ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention, a landmark treaty that will protect our soldiers and our citizens from the threat of poison gas. We reached agreement in Madrid to open the doors of NATO to Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, while creating a stronger partnership with Russia and Ukraine, to build a Europe that is undivided, democratic, and at peace. These past months have been a remarkably fruitful time for bipartisan action in the national interests, and I think we have to continue that work. I should mention, too, that we worked in a bipartisan fashion to maintain our normal trade relationships with China, reaching out to a quarter of the world's population while making our differences with the government over human rights and other matters clear. These are major accomplishments, all achieved with the support of Americans, both Democrats and Republicans. They have strengthened our nation. And yesterday, we took an historic action to eliminate the annual budget deficits we have been seeing, and piling up, since 1969.  The first step toward that was taken back in 1993 when we abandoned supply-side trickle-down economics, opened a new chapter in fiscal responsibility with a new strategy of growth, based on reducing the deficit, investing in education and training, opening the world to trade and American products and services. Even before yesterday, the deficit had been reduced by over 75 percent as a result of this strategy. But yesterday, when I signed into law the first balanced-budget act in a generation, we know that it will add to the long-term economic growth potential of the United States. We know, too, that it includes the largest increase in college aid since the G.I.  Bill 50 years ago, the largest increase in children's health since Medicaid was enacted, first, over 30 years ago. Today, I have some more good news. Our efforts have led to an even lower deficit than we had previously projected. In this, the fourth year of the five-year economic plan adopted in 1993, we now expect the deficit to drop to $37 billion. Yet, without the bipartisan balanced budget we just passed, our budget officials estimate the deficit would rise next year, to $50- to $100 billion, and stay at that level for years to come. With our bipartisan balanced budget plan, we now expect it not only to reach balance by 2002, but to have a surplus in excess of $20 billion, and to be able to maintain that for several years thereafter. There are still big challenges and tough decisions that we have to make beyond the balanced budget, however, if we're going to keep our economy growing, and keep our people fully prepared for the new century. To meet that, members of Congress from both sides of the aisle and Americans from all walks of life must summon the will and spirit that led to the balanced budget. We have a lot of work to do in the rest of this year. First, if we expect to keep our economy strong and growing, we must continue to invest in the education and training of our people, and we must succeed in our push for high national standards and tests to make sure our students, our schools, and our teachers are doing the job. Second, we must tackle the tough issue of entitlement reform. We have to make tough choices to strengthen and protect Medicare and Social Security over the long run. They are the two most important social service innovations of the 20th century. This is not simply a matter of fiscal responsibility; it is also a matter of honoring the duties we owe both to our parents and to the next generation. The balanced-budget bill I signed yesterday sets up a bipartisan commission to reform Medicare. This fall, along with the members of the Congress, I will appoint the members of the commission and they will get to work. We'll also tackle other issues to strengthen our families, exploring ways to improve child care in America and continuing our efforts to reduce the use of tobacco among our children. Third, we will grow our economy and create good jobs by continuing to open more foreign markets to our goods and services -- through tough, fair trade agreements. We must continue to reach out to the more than 95 percent of the world's consumers who live beyond our borders. That is why I will ask Congress to give me fast-track authority to negotiate new trade agreements that will extend free and fair trade to keep our economy going. Fourth, it is obvious that we cannot fulfill our obligations to future generations unless we also deal responsibly with the environmental challenge of global climate change.  Growing our economy need not -- indeed, it must not -- contradict our commitment to protecting the environment. When the nations of the world meet in Kyoto in December, we must all take concrete steps to address this problem. The United States must commit to realistic and binding limits on our emissions of greenhouse gases. The science demands that we act, and again, we owe it to our children. Finally, let me say, as I did in the State of the Union address, that one of our most critical pieces of unfinished business remains campaign finance reform. When Congress returns from its vacation, Senators McCain and Feingold have made clear they will bring campaign finance reform legislation to the floor of the Senate. This will be the time of testing. The special interests and their allies have killed reform year after year. But this year, the eyes of America will be on the Senate floor. I will give my strong support to McCain-Feingold, and if the American people will give their strong support, I am determined that we can prevail. It should not be as easy this year, as it has been in each of the four previous years, to kill campaign finance reform with a Senate filibuster by a minority of the Senate. This year it is very important that every American know where every single elected Federal official in Washington stands on this issue. Are you yes, or are you no? It should be clear and unambiguous, and I believe if it is, we have a chance to succeed in passing the bill. All these challenges will require bipartisan cooperation. Many of them will require difficult decisions. But this balanced budget and the prosperity we are now enjoying gives us a rare opportunity to take these steps for the long-term well-being of our country. We can meet the challenges of the 21st century. We can have higher educational standards, entitlement reform, campaign finance reform, expanding trade, and a cleaner environment. This budget agreement shows that we can do all these things when we work together to find common ground. We have to carry this spirit into the fall for the hard work ahead. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERSQ:  The United States has avoided nurturing peace for a long time in the Middle East -- a tinderbox. . . . But yet, editorially, the Washington Post says your choices are -- and if you'll permit me to read it -- says, ''Up to now, President Clinton has avoided confronting the implications of Mr. Netanyahu's reluctance to bargain territory for a Palestinian settlement. Now he must decide whether to minimize short-run frictions with the Israeli government or reach for a long-term peace.''What do you say to that? A:  Well, first of all, let me say that the Secretary of State gave a very important speech to the Press Club at noon today. I read the speech last night. I went over it with great care, and I am in full accord with what she said. Secondly, in this year alone, the United States helped to broker the Hebron agreement. We have hosted all the leaders from the Middle East here. Dennis Ross has been to the Middle East twice. We have worked very hard on this. . . . The question is not whether the United States or this administration, on any given day or week, is popular or not in any foreign capital. The question is: Are we doing what is most likely to work? And sometimes reasonable people can disagree about that. . . .I have asked Dennis Ross to go back to the region, to primarily discuss security. As Secretary Albright made clear, until the parties trust each other, and until the Israelis believe that the Palestinian Authority is making 100 percent effort, which is different from 100 percent results, but making 100 percent effort on security, it is impossible for peace to proceed. . . .On the substance of the peace process, the parties still have to make the final decision.  But on the process itself, how to get the process going again with some integrity designed to restore confidence in both parties, I think the United States can and should offer its best ideas. And that is exactly what we intend to do. . . .Q:  Well, the point of friction has been the settlement. And do you think you have been evenhanded in that respect? A:  Well, I think we've made it clear to the Israelis that we don't think anything should be done which undermines the trust of the parties and violates either the spirit or the letter of the Oslo Accord, and which predetermines the outcome of final settlement issues under Oslo. . . .But let me say, there is no parallel between bombs and bulldozers. You cannot draw a parallel. We cannot have an environment in which people believe the way to get what they want is to kill innocent people in a marketplace. Furthermore, I believe the people who are responsible for those terrorist bombs are the enemies of the Palestinian Authority as well. And I think they ought to see that. It is imperative that Mr. Arafat understand that those people are not his friends, either. Those people do not want a peace. Their closest allies in terms of political objectives may be their most extreme enemies in Israel who do not believe that peace is possible. The people that murdered all those people, those innocent civilians, are not trying to get a peace that they think is more favorable to the Palestinian and the Arab cause. They are trying to murder the peace process. And as soon as we all understand that and go back to work on it, then I think, you know, we have as chance to make progress. But I also believe that the government of Israel clearly has a responsibility to carry its end of the load, too. This has got to be a two-way street. . . .Q:  The tax cut and budget bills that you signed yesterday were criticized by your own Treasury secretary as ''heavily laden with special interest provisions.'' You have the power to use the line-item veto to take out some of those special-interest tax breaks. Are you planning to exercise that power? A:  Well, the short answer is that I expect there will some exercise of that. But let me tell you what we're doing. First of all, I have asked my staff and relevant Cabinet members to review both the budget bill and the tax bill. . . .In the tax bill, there are certain limited -- and they're quite limited -- special tax provisions that are subject to the line-item veto. In the budget bill, there are certain special spending programs under the so-called entitlement umbrella that are subject to the line-item veto. I must act on either one of them within five days from yesterday, excluding Sunday. That's what the law says. In addition to that, as the annual appropriations are passed, they too -- the spending items within the annual appropriations -- are subject to the line-item veto. So what I've asked my staff and Cabinet to do is to meet with me, first of all, make sure I am aware of the items that are subject to veto in the tax bill and in the budget bill that I signed. And then the second thing we have to do is to make absolutely sure that none of these things that we don't think are very good were part of the agreement. That is, this was an agreement entered into in good faith, and I cannot use the line-item veto on anything that our negotiators agreed to let go through. I think that's very important. . . . Then after that, we'll have a category of items, and I will just go down and evaluate them and decide whether I think that they are sufficiently objectionable that they should be vetoed. Q:  On this deficit reduction that you've just mentioned, that it's now fallen to $37 billion, doesn't it raise the question that in fact the budget could be balanced a lot sooner if you and Congress hadn't enacted $95 billion in tax cuts? A:  Well, let me say this, if we hadn't done anything, if we'd had no tax cuts and no other changes, our estimates are -- keep in mind these tax cuts are over a five-year period -- our estimates are that we would have a deficit which would rise over the next five years and stay at about the level of $100 billion. So you can also say that if we hadn't spent $24 billion on children's health care, we could balance the budget, if we abolished the spending on education we could do it.  The question is, can we do this in a way that also helps the American people and gives them some of the benefit of the prosperity that has been generated in the last five years. . . .There's a lot of discussion about this tax cut. I want to make two things clear. This tax cut is a small fraction of the size of the tax cut that was adopted in '81 that started us down the road to permanent structural deficits. . . .No. 2, 80 percent of this tax cut goes to three things which will benefit the vast majority of Americans: education, the child tax credit, and the initiatives to help isolated and distressed urban and rural communities. . . .Q:  What makes you believe that future Congresses will continue along the path to keep the -- to balance the budget in 2002 or to keep it balanced? And also, sir, in 1994 you referred to ''extreme Republicans who want tax cuts and spending increases and balanced budgets -- all this ridiculous stuff.'' That seems to be what you got yesterday. I mean, you came here intending to stimulate the economy with government spending and to get universal health care. Why did you change your mind? A:  That's not accurate. I also said that we would cut the deficit in half in four years. We did better than I said; we cut it by 75 percent in four years. . . .I also said that I would have to eliminate programs, cut the size of government by at least 100,000, and do more things that we had -- that -- I believed we could reduce the deficit and increase targeted investment. . . .There are more entitlement savings in the Medicare program in this budget than ever in any budget since Medicare's been enacted -- about $400 billion. There are new, modest fees for home health care in the Medicare premium. So, there will be -- this is not all increased spending. Some things will be increased, many things will be decreased. And if we do it, we'll produce growth. . . .I'm convinced that if we did not pass this plan, and did not say to the world and to the investor community ''we're going to balance the budget,'' it would slow economic growth. . . .Why do I think subsequent Congresses will stay with this? Because I think that they have seen what happens if you do this, if you have fiscal responsibility and you're running a balanced budget when you have good economic times, then you get rewarded in the markets, and your economy does well. If you spend a lot of money you shouldn't be spending, and you run big deficits in good economic times, the international financial markets will punish the United States. They will drive up interest rates, they will drive down the value of our stock market, they will weaken our economy, and they will make the deficits even worse. Q:  You said that the American people should know where every political figure in Washington stands on campaign finance. Yet, at the same time that you've called for an end to soft money, you continue to raise it for your party. . . .A:  We live in a competitive world. And notwithstanding what the image may be, constantly -- and you see again in the press today -- the Republicans raise more money, raise more big money, and raise more money from non-citizens than the Democrats do.  But we have to raise enough to be competitive. . . .But the lesson that we have learned is there is too much money in this system, but it's because of the cost of communication.  It's the cost of communication that's driving this up. And so we have got to get free air time or reduced air time, and we've got to get campaign finance reform. . . .Let me just say. Look at what we have done, just since the first of this year. We want the F.C.C. to deal with the issue of free air time. I have appointed an advisory committee to explore that. I have asked former Vice President Mondale and former Senator Nancy Kassebaum-Baker to head a national group to get citizens involved in campaign finance reform. I have asked the F.E.C. to reconsider the rules that it made, which made soft money possible in the first place.  And I am supporting Kennedy-Kassebaum.  I don't know what else I can do. . . .Q:  You spoke of entitlement reform, but the Medicare Commission will not return its recommendations until the spring of 1999. . . . First of all, in that context, one year before the presidential elections begin, do you really believe that there will be the political will to do something drastic vis-a-vis Medicare reform? And number two, on Social Security, you've had a chance to think about this for several years now. Can you tell us what your recommendations might be in terms of keeping Social Security from going bankrupt? A:  Well, first let me -- let me deal with the Medicare issue. . . . I think that, first of all, this commission may decide to make interim recommendations and we may take a series of steps. Secondly, if they make a package recommendation at the end, and it has the support of all these appointees -- and I can assure you, I'm going to work hard to appoint distinguished, good people to this commission that will inspire confidence in our citizens -- then I think that Congress will be prepared to act on it. And I feel the same way about Social Security. . . .These systems would work for a longer period of time than they otherwise will but for the fact of the baby boom and the fact that all seniors are living longer. . . . When the baby boomers retire, because of the length of life of senior citizens, there will come a time when there will be almost only two people working, just a few more than two people working, a fraction over two, for every one person on these programs. And you asked me do I think that we will take the steps necessary to reform them. I do. And I -- I feel that for a simple reason:  No. 1 -- and I'm the oldest of the baby boomers -- I don't believe that our generation wants to ask our children to make drastic sacrifices to support us because we wouldn't take modest steps now that don't have to affect the people that are now retired at all. You know, if we can deal with this over a longer period of time that -- and in ways that don't affect people who are now retired at all, or at least in a very minimal fashion -- and I think it's an intergenerational obligation, and I expect it to be fulfilled. Q:  The stock market has been soaring in recent months. Are you worried or concerned about whether ordinary Americans understand the risk involved in their investments at this time? A:  Hmm. Anything I say is wrong, right? If I say yes, the market drops tomorrow. If I say no, someday it'll drop, and I'll be a heel. . . .That increase has been accompanied by a very brisk growth in our economy and strong growth in productivity. . . .You know, all markets go up and down at various times. But I think that if you go back over the last 30 years, investments in the stock market held over the long term have panned out pretty well. And there aren't too many people of modest incomes who put a huge amount of money in the stock market on one day and then have to take it out four months from now no matter what. And, you know, I think that these mutual funds, these retirement funds, they can mix their investments, and they can do it over a longer period of time. So I think that on the whole what they're doing is betting on the larger American economy. And I think that's a very good bet. Q:  In light of the new alliance between Apple and Microsoft that was announced today I wondered if you could tell us if you're troubled at all by the phenomenal growth of the Microsoft Corporation and if you or your administration is considering putting any limits on that growth if you -- and if not, how this is different from oil and steel and the railroads in the early parts of the century. A:  I can't comment on this particular announcement today because it just happened today and its economic effects under our laws have to be analyzed. But, as you know, that Microsoft has been involved in the last -- since I've been president -- in various legal issues relating to its organization and operations. And I think, all I can tell you is we will treat them in the same way we would anyone else, and make the analysis of law that seems appropriate in the Justice Department. I have to wait to hear from them about whether there are any antitrust implications to this. Q:  Mr. President, in a civil suit filed against you, attorneys for the plaintiff have issued a subpoena for an individual who may or may not have worked in the White House. Your staff, when asked to clarify the status of that individual in the past, refuses to answer the question and refers it to an outside attorney.  Even for those of us who don't have much appetite for this entire subject, this particular answer in this particular category, seems needlessly evasive. . . .A:  Well, first of all, I think the answer is probably known. But I think that Mr. Bennett and the person in question's lawyers gave the only relevant answers. And there was a request to be left alone and not harassed, and we're just trying to honor it. I don't really have anything to say -- to add to what Mr. Bennett already said about it. Q:  I want to ask a question about the U.P.S. strike. But before I do, I want to just clarify what you meant by the line-item veto, that you expect to exercise it. Do you mean between now and Monday you expect to exercise or it, or exercise it in the fall when there are appropriations bills? A:  I mean I expect to exercise it, and I know -- I am anticipating that there will be some things between now and Monday that I would want to exercise it on. But I want to emphasize this: I have not had a briefing on this, and I literally -- all I know about this is what I have read in the press, you know, about the list of tax items which are subject to the line-item veto. . . .But I honestly don't know enough to tell you today: Here's something I'm going to veto. . . .Q:  If I could just ask on the U.P.S. strike -- there are lot of small businesses out there that are suffering right now as a result of this. And they see you standing by, encouraging both sides to go back to the bargaining table but not really doing anything about it.  And some of your critics are saying that's because the labor unions supported you and the Democrats, so overwhelmingly, over these past few years. Is that a fair criticism of why you're standing aside and not----A:  No. Q:  ----getting directly involved in this strike? A:  No. Let me urge you all to do one thing, because I think it would be very helpful to people, to the American people, generally, to know this. If you compare what I did in the American Airlines strike, which is the only strike I have been involved in where -- you know, recently where I had some authority there -- the airline companies, because they take passengers, are governed by a Federal law, which gives the president the power to intervene if there is substantial economic danger or damage to the country. The U.P.S. strike with the teamsters is not covered by that law. It is covered by the Taft-Hartley Act. If you look at the Taft-Hartley Act, there has to be a severe damage to the country. The test is very different and very high before the President can intervene. . . .I'm very concerned about all the customers and users of U.P.S. and what's happening to them. But I do not believe that it is a fair reading of the Taft-Hartley law, which is the law I have to act under, that the high standard of that law has been met. . . .Q:  You also put into law yesterday, of course, with the tax and budget provisions, was the District of Columbia rescue plan and there's an extraordinary amount of roiling around and criticism in the city and I think around -- perhaps around the country about what's taken to be a trampling of home rule for this nation's capital city as democracy advances in the rest of the world, some folks are worried that it may be receding here and the fact that Mayor Barry's powers have been reduced to a certain extent as an un-elected control board comes in to make these management reforms and deal with the aid. And there are some that think that this may be an attack on Mr. Barry personally, that this is in the legislation. Are you concerned about this to the extent that you're going to try to do anything to follow up on it, talk to Ms. Norton. I wonder what reaction would be? A:  Well, first of all, we've already been in touch with Congresswoman Norton about this in some detail. Let me back up and say that I think on balance the legislation was very good for the District of Columbia because it will have the affect of injecting about $200 million in cash into the city this year. As the state -- the federal government pays a higher share of the Medicare budget of D.C., it begins to take over the prisons, it begins to assume the pension liabilities, what I was hoping to do was to remove from the District of Columbia the burdens that normally are borne by a state but that this city has had to bear, and then to give the local officials more responsibility for the things that a city must do: run a good school system, keep the streets safe, repair the roads and the highways and the streets, and do the other things that the city has to do. And the Congress simultaneously wanted to strengthen the whole reform system that was represented by the control board. And it was a congressional initiative and, if you will, a condition of getting the financial relief that the provisions that you mentioned were adopted which, among other things, require a joint agreement of new department heads between the Mayor and the head of the control board. . . .Frank Raines, as all of you know, is representing me in our D.C. negotiations.  I've asked him to try to get together with the parties and see if we can find a way to make these appointments consistent with home rule, and that if he finds the situation to be untenable, to come back to me with some suggestions about what we should do then. . . .There are some very interesting tax provisions in this bill, which are similar to the tax credits that we gave generally around the country for people to hire people off welfare, for people who would go into the inner cities in the high-poverty areas. And then there is, for the first time ever, a zero capital gains on people who start trade or businesses in high-poverty areas of D.C. So we are trying to rebuild the economic infrastructure of the city as well. . . .Q:  You wanted a dialogue on race, and you have a dialogue on race right now, the black-white issue, and particularly the issue of an apology for slavery, and reparations. Are you hoping that the issue were to go away by giving it to the race advisory board? Because there is word that you would like it to go away. A:  I don't know that I hope the issue will go away. What I hope the issue -- what I hope will happen is that the issue will not dominate all the other things that need to be discussed about the past, the present, and the future. . . .There will be dialogue. There will be research and studies done. And there will be policies flowing. And you know, I've already announced the first major policy under this initiative, which is the $250 million program to give people -- to defray the cost of college education for people who will teach in under-served areas. Q:  When this administration calls on the Palestinian Authority to take sustained action to prevent terrorism, what specific steps are you looking for? And secondly, do you personally believe that Yasir Arafat and the Palestinian Authority have fulfilled the obligation to prevent terrorism? A:  Let me answer them in order. No. 1, we expect them to resume meaningful, real, consistent security cooperation with the Israeli authorities in the way that they do when they work best. No. 2, we expect them to act on the information that they have. You can't hold them to the information that they don't. But they have proven in the past quite effective at rounding up people and arresting them for good cause. And No. 3, we expect that if there are people there who are really serious threats to the peace and to innocent civilians, they should be kept behind bars, if it is legal to do so. . . .In answer to your second question, I would have to say that I could not say that there has been constant, 100 percent effort. . . . But I know that it's been discouraging for the Palestinian Authority. I know they get frustrated. I know that sometimes Mr. Arafat feels like he's caught in the middle, between his own population and their discontents and frustration, and his frustrations in dealing with the Israeli government. But none of that can be an excuse for not maintaining security. If you go back and read Oslo, they promised 100 percent effort on security; No. 1. No. 2, never mind Oslo, you can't have a civilized society if you permit terrorism. And No. 3, in the end, the terrorists are the enemy of moderate, constitutional government among the Palestinians. . . .Q:  You have repeatedly expressed your admiration and support for Governor Weld. But how far are you willing to go to see him confirmed? . . .A:  I believe that Governor Weld would be a good ambassador to Mexico and is rather uniquely situated to be a good ambassador to Mexico because of his background, his experience, his knowledge, because he does know a lot about the drug trafficking and he's been criticized for that. . . . I think at least the man ought to get a hearing and ought to get his day in court, if you will, his day before the committee. And I was encouraged to hear Senator Lugar say that. We've got a team organized in the White House to try to help promote his nomination.  And we'll do the very best we can. And we'll see what happens. But I believe he ought to be the ambassador, and I'm going to try to see him confirmed. Q:  In many of the nursing homes owned by corporates there are very few small staffs for a very large number of patients and the staff are paid very little, therefore they take it out on the patients. And some of these patients and many of them are hungry and they're abused and they're mistreated and nationally we ought to do something about it. I'm sure you can. A:  Well, let me say, there are two issues here really in terms of what happens to older people who are not living at home and to some extent in home. There's the nursing home situation, there's the people who are living in institutions that aren't quite nursing homes, and then there are people who are getting home care and the question of whether the home cared are getting actually is what they contracted for and whether they're being properly paid. The Department of Health and Human Services is looking at the question of whether we can streamline and make more effective the regulation of nursing homes and also how we're going to go about getting money stopping spending money in other forms of support for seniors where the money basically is being ripped off through fraud and abuse. And I hope that, over the next few weeks, we will have something to say about that, that will reassure people and their families who are in nursing homes. Q:  Another line-item veto question. You said that some of these candidates for a veto were negotiated in good faith, they're part of the agreement. Could you explain to the American people why a tax cut that benefits 100 or fewer taxpayers is ever in the national interest? It sounds like the very definition of a ''special-interest goodie.''A:  Well, it's certainly the definition of a ''special-interest group,'' but not all special interests are always in conflict with the general interest. If that were true, our country would not have survived for over 200 years. But I want to look at them and see, because you say that anything that benefits a hundred or fewer taxpayers must, by definition, be a special interest. But it could be a sector of the economy where there are fewer than a hundred businesses now, where there is a national interest in keeping a certain activity going; alternative -- or something that's good for the environment, for example. I don't know. I don't want to comment because I have not seen these. But I would think that there are cases -- for example, there may be a case where an injustice was done to a taxpayer, or a small class of taxpayers, and we are trying to fix that. There may be a -- or -- and that's the one case I can think of -- the other case is where there'd be fewer than a hundred firms in a given economic area where we'd want to do something. Q:  A minute ago, in talking about campaign finance reform, you said I will live under any set of rules that are there. But violations of the rules that are in place -- or apparent violations, exactly why there are Thompson hearings in the Senate, why your own Justice Department has an investigation going. Why don't you appeal to two people who are trying to help you, Charlie Trie and John Huang, to come and tell their story? They've begun to talk to ABC And other media. You make an appeal to them to come and tell what they did, and why they did it, and help move past the investigations that are there now? A:  Well, first of all, the -- I have encouraged, and I will do it again now. I've said I think everybody ought to work out a way to cooperate with this committee, and to get all the information out. Secondly, the State Department specifically has tried to work with the congressional committees, with regard to anybody who might be out of this country. So, I don't know what else we can do on that. And I certainly have been fully cooperative, and will continue to do so. But what have we learned in these hearings? We've learned that there were problems. We've learned that -- now we've learned both parties had problems. We've learned that a lot of money was raised, and a lot of money that was spent. And I hope we've also learned that a lot of what was legal -- and that was the import of Allison's question earlier. I hope we've also learned that a lot of what is legal would be better off if it didn't happen. We'd be better off if we had ceilings on contributions to the political parties.  We'd be better off if somebody couldn't give a million dollars to a political party at one pop. And that all leads you back to the same place; we either will or we won't pass a credible campaign finance reform bill this year. Some people would be for it, and some people will be against it. If the public is permitted to think for a moment that they're all the same and they're all doing it and nobody really wants it, then that is an absolute, lock-down guarantee that no bill will pass. There must be a clear distinction between those who are for and those who are against. And until there is in the public mind, people won't think they're going to be held accountable for that vote, and those who benefit from the present system will do what they can to keep it. Q:  The American Bar Association is considering recommendations to limit the independent counsel statute in their annual meeting in San Francisco this week, a series of recommendations including limiting what offices can be investigated, and the elimination of the need for a final report. First of all, where do you stand on these recommendations? And second of all, in 1999, if this statute were reauthorized, would you veto it? A:  Well, I think -- let me say first of all, the American Bar Association has taken a great interest in this, and ought to be viewed as a little bit, at least, of a neutral observer here. And they have pointed out some abuses of the law that are general, and some abuses of the law that are specific to certain specific independent counsels. And I think that in this case, I ought to be like the rest of the country; I ought to wait for their recommendations and study them.  I can't comment on their recommendations till I know what they are and what the grounding is. But I'll be eager to hear them. Q:  On tobacco, there were news accounts this week that you plan to take some additional smoking steps pertaining to Federal property. In the coming months and coming year, do you plan to be active on some of the international issues as U.S. companies emphasize sales abroad; things like the World Health Organization's idea for some standards on labeling, or there have been bills introduced in Congress that would prohibit U.S. employees from promoting the export of tobacco products. A:  Well, I think that there may be some multilateral actions that we would want to be a part of. And to be honest with you, I haven't had a great deal of time to think about it. I know that sales have been declining in the United States and in Latin America, and going up in Asia and in Eastern Europe, and that it's natural to expect that the companies will try to, you know, accelerate the growing markets. And I, you know, I, if they're dangerous to children here, they're dangerous to children there. What I'm focused on now is completing my evaluation of this proposed settlement, protecting the jurisdiction of the F.D.A. and the victories we've already won, and continuing to advance the health interests of the American people. But it is inevitable -- it is as inevitable as the sun coming out today that international institutions will be called upon and nations will be called upon to responsibly deal with this. Q:  Next week, India will celebrate 50 years of independence, and you have been invited by New Delhi and also by the Indian community in Washington to attend the functions. Are you going to one of the functions?  Also, how do you view the last 50 years of U.S. and India relations, the world's largest two democracies, under your administration? A:  Well, first, I hope to do something here in Washington to recognize the beginning of what will be a yearlong celebration of Indian independence. . . . There'll be some overlap in when Pakistan will be celebrating its 50th year of independence. And, you know, it's not a very hot issue here in the United States, but it's a source of continuing concern to me that the people of Pakistan and the people of India have not been able to work through their differences, because if they could do so, I'm convinced that they could quickly begin to enjoy economic growth rates at the level of the highest East Asian communities and be our best partners for the future. So I'm hoping that not only can we observe India's anniversary, but that we can be an even better friend in the next 50 years and a more constructive supporter of resolving these difficulties in the near term. Thank you. CLINTON ON THE ISSUES

AS time grows short in the latest and most serious attempt to deal with the prospect of global warming, everyone is waiting for two decisive players -- the United States and Japan -- to get their acts together. Last week in Bonn, negotiators representing 145 countries inched closer to what would be the first international agreement on legally binding reductions in emissions of waste industrial gases, like carbon dioxide, that trap heat in the atmosphere.  Mainstream scientists say these greenhouse gases threaten to disrupt the earth's climate and may already be doing so. But with only one more session scheduled in the two-year-old talks before a final meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in December, both the United States and Japan have yet to produce their proposals for specific reductions and timetables. Until they do, negotiators here said, no breakthrough is possible. Japanese and American proposals are ''the key to the success of the process,'' Raul Estrada-Oyuela of Argentina, the chairman of the United Nations-sponsored talks, told the delegates. Japan is seen as a pivotal nation because of its economic strength and because, as host of the final session, it will be in a special position to influence the outcome of the talks. The United States, by virtue of its economic weight, international influence and huge emissions of greenhouse gases, is the 900-pound gorilla of international climate politics.''Without the U.S., nothing will happen -- it is absolutely crucial,'' said Bert Metz, a veteran climate negotiator from the Netherlands. It may be that nothing will happen anyway. The complexities, economic stakes and rival interests at play in the talks are such that few would express surprise if they failed to produce a meaningful agreement.  But leaders of major countries have become personally engaged in the issue, infusing it with new bite and raising it to a new level of relevance and visibility. President Clinton says that he finds the scientific evidence for the fact of climate change ''pretty compelling.'' He supports legally binding but ''realistic'' emissions reductions.  He has opened a campaign to rally popular support for what could be unpopular steps to reduce the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil, the main source of carbon dioxide emissions. But the United States has yet to propose any amounts by which emissions should be reduced or to say when limits should take effect. Until it puts numbers on the table, the nature and strength of the American commitment are impossible to judge. American negotiators in Bonn told a number of major countries privately that Mr. Clinton was strongly committed to binding action and that his Government was working intensively to complete the specifics of its proposal, a senior Administration official said. The American delegates also told their counterparts that any agreement acceptable to the United States must maintain economic growth, the official said. The Administration is widely expected to announce its proposal after a scheduled White House conference on climate in early October and before or during the next negotiation session here, from Oct. 20 to Oct. 31. Toshiaki Tanabe, the chief Japanese delegate in Bonn, acknowledged the concern about his country and the United States. Like the Americans, he said in an interview, Japan is ''still in the process of working out our figures.'' He did not say when they would be ready. While the talks go on, lobbying and debate intensify. On one extreme are representatives of industries that produce fossil fuels, who argue that cutting emissions will hurt economies. It is better, they say, to study  global warming more to be sure that the remedy matches the threat rather than rush to judgment. On the other end of the spectrum are environmentalists who say that every year that passes without action will make climatic disruption more likely, more serious and more painful to deal with in the end. Unless a first step is taken now, they say, it might be years before the opportunity comes again, and by then climatic disruption might be obvious to all. The most influential reduction proposal on the table so far is that of the European Union, which calls for industrialized countries to cut their emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide (all greenhouse gases) by 15 percent by 2010 and by 7.5 percent by 2005. No reduction targets and timetables for developing countries are being formally discussed in Bonn.  Those countries have a general obligation, under a 1992 climate treaty signed in Rio de Janeiro, to reduce their emissions. But a conference of parties to the treaty that met in Berlin in 1995 expressly exempted the poorer countries from any new, more specific commitments in the present talks. The poorer nations have long insisted that since the industrialized countries got rich by burning fossil fuels, developing countries should not be unfairly penalized as they build their own industries. The issue of the developing countries' role may be the thorniest in the talks, and many insiders believe that it has the most potential to scuttle them. Both the Clinton Administration and the United States Senate, which must ratify any Kyoto deal, are insisting that all countries must play some role in reducing emissions. Otherwise, it is feared, some American industries might move their operations to developing countries if those countries had no similar emissions controls. The 1992 treaty, ratified by the Senate, included an important compromise on principle: Since the rich countries have emitted the most greenhouse gases so far, they should take the lead in controlling emissions. But the developing countries' emissions are expected to equal or surpass those of the richer nations after 2010 or so, and it was always expected that the developing countries would follow the lead of the developed nations -- once it was clear that they were indeed moving. That evidence has not yet appeared. First, the rich countries have generally failed to cap their emissions at 1990 levels voluntarily, as the treaty says they must aim to do.  Only two large countries, Germany and Britain, are succeeding at that.  And there is that lack of concrete new proposals from the United States and Japan. There are a number of ways the developing countries might participate. Their targets and timetables need not be the same as that of the rich countries, for example, and their adoption could be contingent on the rich countries' adoption of their own targets and schedules. Or a rich country could get credit for some emissions reductions by providing money or technology to help a developing country reduce its emissions.  That would cut the cost of the reductions, and since the gases, once emitted, quickly become part of a single, global concentration, it does not matter where the reductions come from. The United States favors this ''joint implementation'' approach but, over all, developing countries are skeptical. Still, the idea is already being tested in pilot projects, although no emissions-reduction credit is yet being awarded to rich countries for undertaking them. At the meeting here, representatives of developing countries, citing recent studies, said they were already doing more than expected to control emissions. As for binding new commitments for the poorer nations, ''one should not take on something he is not able to deliver,'' said Mark J. Mwandosya of Tanzania, the chairman of the developing-country caucus in the talks. But he did not rule anything in or out, saying he ''wouldn't like to prejudge Kyoto,'' where the developing-country issue is expected to be decided -- or not. As for the industrialized countries, Mr. Estrada said he hoped to have an agreement on their reduction commitments nailed down by the end of the next Bonn session in October (it will be the eighth negotiating session since 1995). Achieving that agreement is not merely a matter of setting reduction targets and timetables. Both the Americans and the Japanese, for instance, believe that the structure within which the reductions would take place is just as important. They want countries to have the flexibility  to achieve reductions in ways that make the best sense for themselves, and at the least cost. The United States, for instance, has proposed that reductions be carried out over a series of multiyear  periods, with the reduction targets  expressed as an annual average of emissions for each period as a whole.  It also advocates the ''banking'' of emissions reductions: applying reductions achieved in one period  against the next, and ''borrowing'' from a future period -- at a penalty -- to meet the current period's targets. The United States further proposes an arrangement called ''emissions trading.'' In this approach, countries that find it difficult and expensive to reduce their emissions could purchase a permit to emit more than they are allowed from countries that find it less costly and easier. The price of the permits would be determined by supply and demand in an open market. The rationale is that in the long run, and over all, emissions reductions would be both cheaper and more effective. In another idea on the table, some countries favor tailoring emissions reductions and the means of achieving them to a country's individual economic and energy profile, rather than imposing a flat-rate, one-size-fits-all target and a fixed set of methods. There would presumably be an overall reduction target, and countries would negotiate how much of it they would be responsible for. The European Union has devised an internal arrangement similar to this for its members, with countries like Britain and Germany taking on bigger reduction burdens than others. But for now, the world is looking to the United States and Japan to take their stands. ''When we have those two proposals,'' Mr. Estrada said,  ''the other pieces will fall into place.''Warming WorldBetween now and December, when representatives of most nations will meet in Japan to discuss limits on greenhouse gases, The Times will examine the science, politics and economics of climate change.

WITH the nations of the world counting down to a Dec. 10 deadline for negotiating cuts in emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases that many scientists say are altering the earth's climate, a fundamental question continues to pervade the debate:Just how urgent is the problem of climate change? The problem has often been perceived as lying off in the dim future  -- a century away, say, since that is the time scale on which most analysis of the question has been based. It can be very hard to get excited about something that seems so remote.  ''We see the train coming,'' President Clinton said not long ago, ''but most ordinary Americans in their day-to-day lives can't hear the whistle blowing.''Mainstream scientists say that the whistle is getting louder all the time,  that many signs of a changing climate are already evident. On the night of Aug. 20 and 21, for instance, a cloudburst poured up to nine inches of rain on New Jersey in three hours.  No conclusions about climate change can be drawn from a single downpour. But it provided one more data point in what Government scientists say is a clear trend in the United States: heavy rainstorms have become more common, making damaging floods more likely, and over all it is raining more than it used to. Other parts of the world have also experienced increases in precipitation in this century. And while the trend's association with global warming is not yet firmly nailed down, mainstream scientists say it is precisely, and unsurprisingly, what would be expected as the earth's atmosphere heats up. The average surface temperature of the globe has risen by about 1 degree Fahrenheit in the 20th century, and about half a degree in the last 40 years -- with temperatures generally rising more the farther away one gets from the Equator. A warmer atmosphere sucks up more water from the oceans and in general makes more moisture available to developing storms. Observations show that atmospheric water vapor has increased. Therefore, the scientists say, global warming may well be revving up the planet's rainmaking machine. A rainier world is just one of several climatic changes already observed that are associated with the warming, scientists say. Temperatures have risen more at night than in the day, portending milder winter evenings but also more deadly heat waves. Experts, for instance, attributed the record death toll in Chicago's 1995 heat wave mainly to a combination of unusually high nighttime temperature and humidity. The area of the Northern Hemisphere covered by snow has generally declined in the last 25 years. Mountain glaciers have receded in many areas. Sea level has risen as warmth has caused the water to expand.  Spring comes earlier and fall arrives later in Northern latitudes, which have become about 10 percent greener.''The climate reality is that if you look out your window, part of what you see in terms of the weather is produced by ourselves,'' said Thomas R. Karl, senior scientist at the National Climatic Data Center in Asheville, N.C. ''If you look out the window 50 years from now, we're going to be responsible for more of it.''Mr. Karl has not been known as a doomsayer on the question of global warming. It was he and his colleagues who analyzed 20th-century climatic data for the United States and southern Canada and found that both overall precipitation and the frequency of intense rainstorms and snowstorms had, on average, increased by about 10 percent over the century. Intense storms were defined as those in the top 10 percent, in terms of the amount of precipitation delivered, at the start of the century. The trend, said Mr. Karl, is consistent with what would be expected in a world made warmer by greenhouse gases -- principally carbon dioxide, which is produced by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas. This is only the beginning, if a panel of more than 2,000 scientists advising the world's governments is right. While no one is predicting apocalypse any time soon, the scientists' best estimate is that the world will warm by more than another half degree in the next 20 years if greenhouse emissions are not reduced (although the underlying trend would surely be modified from time to time by natural climatic variations). With another half degree of warming, the average global temperature would approach the highest experienced in the 10,000 years since the last ice age, said Dr. Thomas J. Crowley, a paleoclimatologist at Texas A & M University. A century from now, according to the scientific panel's best estimate, the earth's surface will be some 3.5 degrees warmer than in 1990. ''You have to go back millions of years to find global temperatures like that,'' said Dr. Crowley. By way of comparison, it was 5 to 9 degrees colder in the depths of the last ice age. The panel predicted that the warming would bring widespread climatic, environmental and economic dislocation. Some benefits are expected to result, including longer growing seasons in Northern Hemisphere breadbaskets and more robust plant growth stimulated by increased carbon dioxide. But many effects would be adverse, including intensified cycling of water through the ocean-atmosphere system that would result in both more frequent and severe floods and droughts; it would rain harder but things would dry out more and faster between storms. Sea level is expected to rise by about a foot and a half, inundating many low-lying coastlines. Climatic zones would shift away from the Equator, upsetting natural ecosystems. Entire forest types might disappear. Agriculture in some parts of the world, especially Africa, might be devastated. The geographical range of tropical diseases would expand. Not all scientists agree with Mr. Karl and the international scientific panel, and the disagreement is symptomatic of a more general, nagging uncertainty that plagues all efforts to gauge the urgency of the climate problem. The uncertainty also complicates the task of negotiators from around the world as they struggle to determine how much and how rapidly greenhouse gas emissions should be cut. The negotiators' next session is in Bonn in late October, with a final session in Kyoto, Japan, in the first 10 days in December.''Yes, there have been these big climate changes, but I think they're all natural,'' said Dr. William M. Gray, a climatologist at Colorado State University in Fort Collins who has been skeptical that greenhouse gases are altering the climate. ''I respect Tom Karl a lot, but I don't agree with his interpretation of his data.'' Another skeptic, Dr. Richard S. Lindzen of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, says that the natural system has built-in resilience -- ''it has to wobble a bit'' -- and that the observed changes are an expression of this. Since he believes that global warming is expected to amount to little, Dr. Lindzen believes there is little or no urgency. The potential Achilles' heel in the mainstream scientists' projections of future climate is that they are based on computerized models of the atmosphere's response to estimates of future greenhouse gas emissions.  Everyone agrees that the models are imperfect, and Dr. Lindzen goes so far as to liken them to Ouija boards, but many experts believe they are steadily improving and becoming more realistic. In any case, they say, there is no other way to even begin to cope with the atmosphere's complexities. The international panel of scientists, which was established by the United Nations and is called the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, relied heavily on the models in rendering its landmark judgment, two years ago, that ''the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate.''  The cautiously phrased statement, a compromise product of intense discussions, was a watershed in the climate debate because until then the panel had always said the observed warming and attendant climate changes could have been a result of natural variability. Since then, some opponents of action to cut greenhouse gases have seized on an article in the May 16 issue of the journal Science, which dealt with uncertainties surrounding the panel's conclusion that humans are probably altering the climate, to suggest that the uncertainty has grown. But that is disputed by the chief author of the intergovernmental panel's chapter on detection of human influence on climate. The scientist, Dr. Benjamin D. Santer of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, who was quoted in the Science article, said in a recent interview that further studies have not only reinforced the original conclusion, but might even strengthen it. And in a recent open letter, he said that despite large uncertainties, ''the question is not whether, but rather to what extent'' greenhouse gases are influencing the climate. The best evidence, he wrote, ''suggests that the human component of climate change is not trivially small.''The size of that component remains, perhaps, the major uncertainty in gauging how urgent the climate change problem is. But if the intergovernmental panel is right, the average global surface temperature will rise by about a third of a degree Fahrenheit per decade over the next century if greenhouse gases are not reduced. Many scientists believe that no matter what action is taken in Kyoto, some substantial measure of future warming is already assured.''We haven't seen the full ramifications'' of the greenhouse gases already emitted, said Dr. Kevin Trenberth, a climatologist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo. The reason is that built-in inertia, mainly stemming from a drag on heating exerted by the oceans, prevents the climate system from reacting immediately to the emissions. Only about half the warming potential of greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere has been realized, said Dr. James E. Hansen, a climatologist who directs the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York. What this means, he said, is that even if greenhouse gas emissions suddenly ceased today, ''you'd get a few tenths of a degree'' of global warming in the next quarter century. But emissions are not going to cease now, since any policy adopted in Kyoto would require some time to have any appreciable effect. This means that atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases would continue to grow. ''You can't turn that off'' right away, said Dr. Trenberth.  He noted that even if emissions were reduced to 1990 levels -- a target that most industrialized nations are already failing to meet -- atmospheric concentrations would continue to rise indefinitely. This is because the 1990 levels were already so high. Dr. Hansen says that ''what we do now is not going to have much influence on climate change in the next couple of decades; the main impact of changes we make now will be 50 and 100 years downstream.'' Consequently, he believes, climatic change is going to become ''more apparent over the next decade or so.'' Dr. Hansen has long been a firm adherent of the view that greenhouse gases are the major cause of the observed warming. Some scientists, while convinced that humans are changing the climate in important ways and that greenhouse warming is a serious issue, believe that taking no action now would have little appreciable climatic effect. One is Dr. Tom Wigley of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, who said, ''Just from a pure climate point of view, another 20 years of doing nothing is unlikely to mess things up.'' He acknowledged that many experts would not agree, and quickly added, ''I'm not saying we should do nothing for 20 years.'' For one thing, he said, ''the longer we delay, then the more we have to do later.''How much to do now is the crux of the discussions that will culminate in Kyoto. The decision is complicated by the fact that while the intergovernmental panel estimated a 3.5-degree increase in average global temperature by 2100, it also said the increase could be as low as 2 degrees and as high as 6. This poses a dilemma, in the view of Dr. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign: If the warming is on the low end of the panel's estimate and the Kyoto delegates decide to do too much, it will be too costly to the world economy. But if it is on the high end and they decide to do too little, climatic damage will be too high and it will still be too costly. What should governments do?  ''We should not do nothing and hope for the best; that's crazy,'' Dr. Schlesinger said. ''On the other hand, we shouldn't do everything, either; we don't want to squander resources on something that might turn out to be a nonproblem.'' He and others call for an adaptive strategy in which at least some action is taken now, and then both the climatic effects and the economic cost of acting are periodically reassessed. Mid-course corrections would be made as needed. This principle is, in fact, built into the 1992 Rio treaty on climate change, under which the present negotiations are proceeding. But then a further difficulty arises, in Dr. Schlesinger's view. Since the effects of any emissions reductions undertaken now would not be apparent in the next two decades, it would be impossible to tell for some time whether the right thing was done.  And if the reductions did subsequently succeed in mitigating the warming, that very fact would make it harder to know how serious the warming would otherwise have been, and therefore what further action might or might not be needed.''That,'' said Dr. Schlesinger, ''is what's so difficult about this cockamamie problem.''THE WARMING WORLD: Coping With Climate Change

THE blame for the global temperature rise in the last century is often laid on civilization and its genius for generating clouds of greenhouse gases that trap sunlight in the atmosphere. But another possible culprit is fast emerging. For centuries, scientists have known that the Sun is less steady than sunbathing and casual observation suggest. It has seasons and storms and rhythms of activity, its sunspots and flares appearing in cycles roughly 11 years long. But only in the last decade or so have these and other kinds of solar variations begun to be tied to climate shifts on Earth -- first tenuously, and more solidly of late. Today, a growing number of scientists contend that the Sun's fickleness might rival human pollution as a factor in climatic change. And some research, though sketchy and much debated, suggests that the Sun's variability could account for virtually all of the global warming measured to date. Other experts dismiss the possibility of such an influence, even while saying the solar factor should be studied more thoroughly. The Sun is now approaching a stormy period in its 11-year cycle, promising a wealth of new data (and possibly hot weather) that might help answer the riddle. In recent years, Sun-Earth climate detectives have focused mainly on discovering statistical links between things like long-term fluctuations in the world's temperature and the sunspot cycle's length, which varies from 8 to 15 years and averages 11 years. Those links are now seen as firm. Increasingly, scientists are trying to pin down the  physical mechanisms that might be at work. This is considered a crucial step because correlations can occur by chance, as is perhaps the case with crimes of violence and the phases of the Moon. But if scientists can discover a ''why'' that links the phenomena, they may be able to turn speculation into verifiable fact. Experts are now scrutinizing three solar variables as likely agents of terrestrial change: the Sun's overall brightness, which is seen as affecting temperatures; the Sun's ultraviolet rays, which are seen as affecting winds and ozone production high in the atmosphere, and the Sun's storms of magnetic fields and subatomic particles, which are seen as affecting rainfall and the amount of cloud cover. Many pieces of the puzzle, said Dr. Brian A. Tinsley, an atmospheric physicist at the University of Texas who works on the problem, are rapidly being ''fitted together to suggest a fascinating picture.''Dr. Sallie L. Baliunas, an astrophysicist at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass., said the breakthrough insight might occur tomorrow ''or we could struggle for decades.'' She added: ''It's maddening. I wish I had a crystal ball.''Interest in the field is rising fast.  At its next annual meeting, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the world's largest general scientific society, is holding a session entitled ''New Frontiers in the Sun-Earth Connection.''Experts say much of the ferment derives from a rush of physicists, astronomers and astrophysicists onto turf customarily trod by meteorologists and atmospheric scientists. In the past, such interdisciplinary forays have been quite fruitful, as when geologists and astronomers seized on cosmic bombardments to explain mass extinctions on Earth over the ages, going far beyond the theorizing of paleontologists.''A lot more people are crossing lines, and that's very healthy,'' Dr. Albert Arking, an atmospheric physicist at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore who studies Sun-Earth interactions, said in an interview. Scientists are ''looking over each other's shoulders instead of putting on blinders,'' he added. ''That's tremendous. It's providing new insights.''The central fact that commands the attention of all scientists investigating climate change is that average global temperatures appear to be rising gradually, going up roughly one degree Fahrenheit between 1880 and the present. The question is why. Most mainstream scientists say they are unsure about how much of the observed warming is due to natural causes and how much stems from human activities. Conventional wisdom points to a significant role for heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide, which is a natural part of the atmosphere but is also emitted by cars, factories and the burning of oil, coal and wood around the globe. Levels of this and other greenhouse gases are rising and are thought to be warming the planet by trapping sunlight that otherwise would be reflected back into space. Heeding this logic, the nations of the world are to meet in December in Kyoto, Japan, to try to negotiate cuts in emissions of the heat-trapping gases. Not surprisingly, given the sketchiness of the science and the political difficulty of trying to curb industrial growth, debate is rising on whether such cuts are warranted. Some experts contend that the majority of the century's warming occurred before 1940 and that most of the gas buildup occurred after that.  Thus, they argue, only part of the temperature rise -- perhaps a small part -- can be attributed to human activity. Clues to the Sun's effect on climate can be found in the many intriguing links between terrestrial shifts and solar activity. For instance, the snow layers of glaciers show curious variations in dust and chemical residues that appear to echo the solar cycle, as do records of tree growth and storm paths. The biggest correlation of all occurred centuries ago, when the number of sunspots fell sharply between 1640 and 1720 and the Earth cooled about two degrees Fahrenheit. Northern Europe was hit especially hard, as its glaciers and winters lengthened. At first, this chill made no sense to modern science. After all, sunspots are magnetic darkenings of the Sun whose temperatures are relatively low. It would seem that their disappearance for almost a century would mark a time of greater solar brightness and thus, if anything, higher temperatures on Earth, not the reverse. The mystery began to lift in the late 1970's as satellites started to fly above the obscuring atmosphere to study the Sun directly. A decade later, the verdict was in. Contrary to intuition, the Sun was found to be brighter when sunspots abounded and dimmer when they vanished. The reason was simple, at least in retrospect. It turned out that bright patches known as faculae, which accompany sunspots in the 11-year solar cycle, overpower the dimming effect of the dark blemishes. This brightening of the Sun has now been observed twice by satellite, and all the evidence suggests that the rhythm is ancient and variable. The discovery toppled centuries of assumptions about the Sun's steadiness and overturned the modern dogma that its radiated energy represents a ''solar constant.'' It also led scientists to study how the variable brightness might affect the Earth.''We figure half the climate change from 1850 to now can be accounted for by the Sun,'' said Dr. Judith Lean of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, who is prominent in such studies. She and her colleagues seek out historical temperature records to probe the likelihood that fluctuations in solar brightness heat and cool the Earth directly. Others say this mechanism is stronger. Dr. Baliunas, of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center, and her co-workers studied records of the past 120 years and found the Sun responsible for up to 71 percent of the Earth's temperature shifts. When other factors were added to their research model, that figure rose to 94 percent. Many experts say that is too high. They note that the Sun's overall radiance appears to ebb by only about one-tenth of 1 percent during the solar cycle -- which is too small to account for dramatic change on Earth, at least by direct heating. So investigators are looking elsewhere. One suspect mechanism focuses on sunlight in the ultraviolet range. Short, potent and invisible, these rays account for most of the brightness change and have significant effects on Earth in addition to direct heating. For instance, ultraviolet rays that strike the upper atmosphere break apart molecular oxygen (O2 ) to form ozone (O3 ), a three-atom type of oxygen that has wide atmospheric repercussions. Dr. Joanna D. Haigh of Imperial College in London has found that increases in heat and ozone at solar maximums might account not only for temperature shifts but for changes in the paths of winter storms. Her study predicted that storms sweeping across the Mediterranean would move northward, on average, about 400 miles during a solar maximum, a shift that would be consistent with observed changes in real weather patterns. As with direct heating, however, the ultraviolet mechanism is often found wanting. The predicted effects ''are still not quite as large as the observed changes'' on Earth during the ups and downs of the solar cycle, Dr. Alan Robock, a meteorologist at University of Maryland, wrote in the May 17, 1996, issue of Science, the weekly journal of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Another possible mechanism is not light from the Sun but rather its winds of particles and magnetic fields, which change dramatically in strength during the solar cycle. On Earth, the solar wind is well known to produce the aurora borealis, or northern lights. When it is blowing strong, it can also cause transformers at power plants to burst into flames, radio communications to fail and satellites to stop working or even fall from the sky. Now the solar wind is getting increased attention as a possible engine of climate change, since its severity appears responsible for a number of terrestrial shifts on time scales from days to centuries. The envisioned mechanism is indirect but intriguing. During peaks of the solar cycle, the Sun's magnetism is perturbed as it stretches past the Earth, blocking some of the cosmic rays that stream in from deep space. Conversely, times of solar quiet allow more cosmic rays to come through. This rhythm is unambiguously reflected in the production of radioactive atoms high in Earth's atmosphere. For instance, times of low solar winds and high cosmic rays coincide with an increase in the amount of carbon-14 that rains down and is eventually incorporated by trees. The analysis of carbon-14 in tree rings gives a detailed history of solar magnetism. Experts suspect that this same mechanism affects the production of clouds and rain, which are major factors in climate change. Dr. Tinsley, of the University of Texas at Dallas, and his colleague Dr. Kenneth V. Beard of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign have found evidence that a high flux of cosmic rays produces high electrical conductivity in the atmosphere and high electrical charges on tiny droplets of water at the tops of clouds, causing rain. Dr. Tinsley found clear links between this mechanism and the paths and intensity of severe winter storms during the solar cycle. His work was intriguing enough to prompt a study of the electrical effect in June 1996 at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico, where 14 papers were presented at a special workshop. Skeptics say the solar ebb and flow is interesting but insufficient to explain satisfactorily the drama of climate change, which they insist is mainly driven by the rise in carbon dioxide. Dr. James E. Hansen of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, a top proponent of the view that humans cause global warming, said in an interview that the effect of solar brightening on climate might be significant ''but smaller than other mechanisms we already know about.''Sun researchers, on the other hand, say the solar mechanisms are just starting to be understood so much work is needed to understand  how they interact and perhaps amplify one another. They say the knowledge of the Sun's role is destined to grow in the years ahead with the rise of new analyses and evidence, especially as a new solar maximum is reached around 2000. Dr. Baliunas said that ''our goal is to make the best model possible'' so scientists can better understand the true role of human pollution in climate change.

For centuries, scientists have known that the Sun has seasons, storms and rhythms of activity, with its sunspots and flares appearing in cycles roughly 11 years long. But only in the last decade or so have researchers begun to tie solar variations to climate shifts on Earth. Today, a growing number of scientists contend that the Sun's fickleness might rival human pollution as a factor in rising global temperatures. And some research, though sketchy and much debated, suggests that the Sun's variability could account for virtually all of the global warming measured to date. The nations of the world are to meet in December in Kyoto, Japan, to try to negotiate cuts in emissions of the heat-trapping gases. Not surprisingly, given the sketchiness of the science and the political difficulty of trying to curb industrial growth, debate is rising on whether such cuts are warranted. Article, Science Times, page F1.

PRESIDENT CLINTON has long been seen as an instinctive politician, one with a talent for sensing a public yearning and turning it to political advantage. So why, when Americans are blithely pumping record amounts of gasoline into their Blazers, Jeeps, and not-so-mini-vans, is he preparing to campaign to cut the nation's use of fuel? Mr. Clinton says his goal is to reduce the threat in coming decades of droughts, coastal floods, and famine from global warming -- a warming of the atmosphere caused by rising concentrations of gases, especially carbon dioxide, released when fuels and forests are burned. He plans to play host at a climate conference at Georgetown University next week to publicize the issue, and he invited dozens of television weather forecasters to meet with him and Vice President Al Gore at the White House Wednesday, also to discuss global warming. Around Washington, where hot, sticky summers are commonplace, those seeking a political explanation for everything say that global warming simply is a safe haven for a second-term President who is eager to divert attention from more uncomfortable subjects, like campaign financing or his personal life. But scientists and officials involved in the intensifying international debate on how to deal with global warming say it has taken the United States far too long to put the issue front and center, particularly because this country is the biggest source of heat-trapping gases, and because the spread of American-style consumerism to developing nations is likely to create the biggest source of the gases in the next century. A strong consensus has built among scientists that global warming, although not a certainty, is a sufficiently serious threat to justify taking some action. Without concrete action by the United States, climate policy experts say, the rest of the world -- which is eager to replicate America's high-revving, energy-hungry economy -- will be unlikely to conserve coal or oil for the sake of the shared atmosphere. President Clinton's decision to tackle the issue now, some of these experts say, was largely prompted by the need to build public support before he fulfills a pledge to commit the United States to firm limits on future greenhouse emissions. Specifics are expected to be announced by the White House next month and made final at an international climate meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in December. That pledge came after Mr. Clinton became the focus of increasingly harsh criticism from countries like Britain and Germany, which have pushed ahead with environmental programs to cut their output of carbon dioxide. But finding ways to convince the American public of the seriousness of the climate threat will be no mean feat. This is particularly true with the nation feeling flush, with gasoline and oil relatively cheap, and with most of the more obvious environmental problems either solved or being attacked. Mr. Clinton had a much easier sell in his last big environmental policy move -- toughening standards for two familiar pollutants, soot and smog. Soot and smog are a visible blight that kills old people and asthmatic children. Bubbles in BeerBut carbon dioxide is far harder to paint as a villain. It is, after all, the same invisible stuff that makes the bubbles in beer. And, unlike smog or water pollution -- where solid evidence has been plain for all to see -- global warming is a looming, complicated problem that never quite seems to arrive. In other words, a nightmare for a politician. There will never be a day when newspaper headlines proclaim ''Earth Warms -- Floods, Famine Erupt,'' climate experts say. Even the particularly nasty storms, floods, and droughts of recent years, although consistent with the theory, can never be directly ascribed to human meddling with the atmosphere. Indeed, some recent work suggests that variations in the sun's brightness could account for some warming. Mr. Clinton will have to overcome inertia that is being fed by industry. Despite a few recent converts, like British Petroleum, most industries that either produce fossil fuels or rely on them still contend that the science is uncertain and are lobbying for more research before action is taken to cut greenhouse pollution. Seth Dunn, a climate and energy analyst at the Worldwatch Institute, a private environmental group, said that a key to any initiative this fall will be to show the economic sense of using fuels sparingly and developing new sources of energy that do not add to the atmosphere's greenhouse burden. An enormous market for such technologies is already building overseas, and could easily spread here as well, he said. One of Mr. Clinton's soldiers in his environmental campaign is Mr. Gore; the prospect of a hothouse planet was a central theme of his best-selling book, ''Earth in the Balance'' (Houghton Mifflin, 1992). Another is Timothy E. Wirth, Undersecretary of State for Global Affairs. Mr. Wirth is a veteran of the communications wars over global warming. As a Senator, he staged one of the first Congressional hearings on the subject during the scorching summer of 1988. To get the point across at the time, staffers called the National Weather Service to be sure the hearing date would be a hot one. ''We had it on that day, and opened all the windows,'' Mr. Wirth recalled. The greenhouse effect became big news. This time, he said, sweaty hearings won't be enough. He said the Clinton Administration is planning to invoke the fate of future generations, just as he did to spur proposed solutions to the budget deficit. To prepare for his improbable climate campaign, Mr. Clinton has been boning up both on the science, and on ways to explain it. Quivering CanariesWhen some of the country's leading climate specialists gathered at the White House in July for a meeting with Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, they provided a host of simple ways to illustrate the problem. Dr. Stephen H. Schneider, a Stanford University biology professor, invoked the image of canaries carried into coal mines to warn of  noxious gas. ''The canary in the cage is starting to quiver,'' Dr. Schneider said. Mr. Clinton slowly repeated the phrase, as if testing it for future use.

IT'S crunch time at the White House on climate change policy. With the meeting on global warming set for Kyoto, Japan, in December, the Clinton Administration has less than three weeks to come up with its own proposal before the agenda is locked in place by meeting planners and America is reduced to the role of commentator. Cynics have assumed that President Clinton would stake out the easy high ground, demanding more from developing countries (or the United States Congress) than they are prepared to give, thereby obviating the need for action. But the Administration is reportedly trying to piece together a plan that rapidly growing economies like China could live with, yet still buy some insurance against climate change. That is why White House policy wonks are now focusing on hybrid plans that limit greenhouse gas emissions, yet provide an escape hatch.''The idea is to get started, but without fear of economic surprises,'' said Richard Morgenstern, a former Environmental Protection Agency official who is a researcher at Resources for the Future, a nonpartisan group in Washington. The European Community is officially gung-ho to set ambitious emissions goals for the developed world and to meet them with the help of carbon emission taxes. The Clinton Administration, by contrast, is reluctant to agree to any policy with teeth unless developing countries -- notably China, India and Russia -- join in. Administration economists are especially taken with emissions trading plans that would allow private businesses in developed countries to pay their counterparts in developing economies to do the heavy lifting. This opens two avenues for rationalizing doing nothing at all. The Administration could earn brownie points with hard-line environmentalists by going along with the Europeans, effectively inviting the Republican Congressional majority to shoot down any agreement. House Speaker Newt Gingrich has already warned against an accord in which ''the U.S. would likely bear too much burden.'' And Republicans would no doubt go to the barricades before approving a new tax on carbon emissions. Or President Clinton could insist that developing countries fully commit to both targets and means for limiting emissions before he presents the deal to Congress. This would seem statesmanlike while indefinitely delaying the need to ask sacrifice from Americans. The ease of procrastination explains the new interest in hybrid proposals from serious policy types in the Administration who want the President to take the lead in Kyoto. The idea is simple, says Mr. Morgenstern, who, in collaboration with Raymond Kopp and William Pizer at Resources for the Future, has outlined its virtues on the group's Web site (www. rff. org). The researchers would set limits on total carbon emissions and parcel out rights to emit that can be traded between businesses and perhaps countries. But they would also guarantee that no one would ever have to pay more than a ceiling price for permits in the private market -- say $10 a ton -- by having governments sell any number of additional permits at the ceiling. If the ceiling price were low enough, business might be willing to go along. Indeed, a few companies -- most notably British Petroleum, which announced a voluntary emissions monitoring program earlier this week in conjunction with the Environmental Defense Fund -- seem eager for modest actions that reduce business uncertainty. And since proposed charges for added permits aren't necessarily ''taxes'' in the Republican lexicon, they, too, might go with the flow. The concept is unappealing to environmental lobbies that want strict targets and timetables. But Mr. Morgenstern suggests that the hybrid approach would call the bluff of perennially optimistic enviros, who argue that there is a cheap fix for every problem. And it would please many economists, who want to set up a framework for efficient containment of greenhouse gases before the risks of climate change are fully understood. ''This would be a way to initiate a broad but realistic commitment,'' argued Robert Stavins of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. Warwick J. McKibbin and Peter J. Wilcoxen, authors of a climate change ''policy brief'' at the Brookings Institution (www. brook. edu), see other benefits. The price ceiling on permits could be set low enough, they suggest, to make it palatable for rich countries to begin containment without the cooperation of developing countries. Moreover, the chance to collect a fee on excess emissions would give revenue-hungry governments an incentive to enforce the standards. The hybrid approach is too new to allow for a realistic assessment of its chances at Kyoto. But it is appealing on its face. More important, its prominence in current Administration thinking suggests that the White House is treating sacrifices in containing climate change as a problem in political coalition-building rather than a potential obstacle to Al Gore's election in 2000. ''The real choice is not between a sharp reduction in emissions and a more modest policy,'' Mr. Wilcoxen said, ''but between a modest policy and no policy at all.''

It was cloudy and cool outside the north portico of the White House this morning as Steve Doocy, the jovial Fox News Channel weatherman, asked Al Roker, the ebullient NBC weatherman, just why it was that the President of the United States had invited them over.''Because we promised to bring Krispy Kremes!'' Mr. Roker chortled. Then he sobered up and told the Fox viewers watching the live broadcast that Mr. Clinton wanted to talk about changes in the global climate.''Al, let me ask you this,'' Mr. Doocy said. ''About the global warming thing -- we're against it, right?''''We don't like global warming,'' Mr. Roker agreed. But he added that, looking at the bright side, he owned some land in Pennsylvania, ''and within a few years, I may have beachfront property!''On the theory that you do, in fact, need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows, Mr. Clinton invited more than 100 national and local television forecasters to the White House today for a chat with him and Vice President Al Gore and for briefings on climate change from Government experts. The Administration hopes that the forecasters will influence public opinion on climate change more than the journalists on the evening news; Clinton aides complain that they pay scant attention to the issue.''You, just in the way you comment on the events that you cover, may have a real effect on the American people,'' Mr. Clinton said this afternoon to the assembled broadcasters, who were overwhelmingly white, male and shorter than they appear on television. Playing host to the nation's television weather forecasters was the most innovative step in a White House campaign to rally public support for new binding global targets for restricting greenhouse gases. A broad coalition of industry and labor groups is spending some $13 million on advertising opposing such targets, which may be adopted at an international conference in December in Kyoto, Japan.''I don't ask for you to advocate or do anything outside of whatever your own convictions are,'' Mr. Clinton said this afternoon, as the skies cleared and the East Room brightened. ''But I do think it's very important, since you have more influence than anybody does on how the American people think about this, that at least you know what you believe and how you think we should proceed.''As the 5 o'clock broadcasts rolled around, dozens of weathermen milled about in the mellowing sunlight on the north lawn of the White House, straightening their hair, consulting notes, muttering lines. While others waited their turns, about six stood bathed in white lights before cameras, speaking to the folks back home or standing, faces blank and microphones at the ready, as they listened for their cues in the distant chatter among the anchors. As they talked about the chill in Buffalo or the pleasant weather here, the forecasters also described the concerns of the President. ''He wants all of us to think about what is happening to our climate,'' said Chuck Gaidica Jr. of WDIV in Detroit. Some were careful to distance themselves from the White House's arguments. Global warming is ''a theory that is widely accepted, but it's still under debate in the scientific community,'' Cecily Tynan told viewers of WPVI in Philadelphia. ''Judging by the P.R. event that was orchestrated here, it's certainly become a very hot topic in the Clinton Administration.''But other forecasters confessed to their viewers that they were thrilled to be there. ''To be honest with you, I'm just like a little kid,'' said Bob Kovachick of WNYT in Albany. After the camera stopped rolling, Mr. Kovachick, like many of the other meteorologists, said that he intended to return to the subject of global warming in broadcasts later tonight and on Thursday. Bryan Norcross, of WBRY in Miami, told his viewers about the detailed presentations from Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore. ''Everyone in the room came away impressed that they know what they're talking about, that this isn't just a political event, even though the Vice President is going to run for President,'' he said. Several weathermen said in interviews that they had already been sold on the dangers of climate change before their visit to the White House. Craig Allen, the CBS morning weatherman, said he felt ''absolutely honored'' to be invited to the day's session. ''He feels very strongly about it,'' he said of the President, ''and he just wants us to get the message out. And I'm happy to do it because I lean in that direction.''Calling the day a success, Michael D. McCurry, the White House press secretary, said that the weathermen ''appreciated being treated as something other than airheads.''Gail MacDonald, president of the Global Climate Coalition, which is made up of business and trade groups opposed to binding targets for reducing emissions, said she did not object to the White House's tactics. ''We think that any kind of any increased public discourse is good,'' she said. ''We think the journalists involved will look critically at the data and be professional.''Indeed, some forecasters said they were frustrated that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore had not spelled out any remedies. Mr. Clinton, who is planning to hold a conference on climate change at Georgetown University on Monday, is not expected to reveal his proposed emissions targets for another two or three weeks.''We really haven't heard what it is they expect us to give up or change in our habits,'' Mr. Gaidica said. ''I mean questions as simple as can we use the barbecue today or can we use the Waverunner anymore.''Beyond such skepticism, some weathermen took advantage of their appearance at the White House to attach a few barbs to their famously chipper chatter. ''We got here real early this morning,'' Mr. Doocy deadpanned on Fox. ''It was just me, the crew, and the special prosecutors.''Correction:  October 10, 1997, FridayAn article on Oct. 2 about a visit by television forecasters to the White House misidentified the television station in Miami where Bryan Norcross presents the weather. It is WFOR, not WBRY.Correction: October 10, 1997, FridayAn article on Oct. 2 about a visit by television forecasters to the White House misidentified the television station in Miami where Bryan Norcross presents the weather. It is WFOR, not WBRY.

As it seeks a new treaty to fight the threat of global warming, the Clinton Administration has turned marketing on its head: first comes the sales pitch, and later the product will be unveiled. Call it publicity or call it education, the results of the campaign that is now reaching full boil could profoundly affect the proposal for controlling climate change that the Administration takes to Kyoto, Japan, in December. There, the nations will try to agree on a binding treaty to limit emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide, which comes mostly from burning fossil fuels. The Administration wants to broaden its public support before its negotiators present specific targets and timetables for greenhouse gas emissions. The proposals will probably not be the steep and urgent cuts supported by American environmentalists and some foreign nations, but at least a meaningful first step toward someday stabilizing the levels of greenhouse gases that have been relentlessly building up in the atmosphere. It's a tough sell.''If anybody tells you this is not a tough issue, they are lying,'' said Todd Stern, a senior White House aide who is coordinating climate policy. ''We have to put together options for the President that are economically viable, that are environmentally viable, and that are politically viable -- both in the international and domestic context.''''We have to stand on the rooftops and scream, because there are those who have a vested interest in not seeing action on climate change,'' said Kathleen A. McGinty, the chairwoman of the Council on Environmental Quality, referring to powerful opposition to a treaty, led by energy-intensive industries and their labor unions. Ms. McGinty said the Administration hoped to present details of the United States proposal when international negotiators next met in Bonn later this month. But even before those details are known, the campaign to build support for it comes to a climax of sorts on Monday when carefully selected greenhouse experts assemble at Georgetown University for a daylong conference. The meeting is half a conventional policy seminar where ecologists, economists and lobbyists can have their say. But it also resembles a political convention, a chance to put Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore in the best possible light as they take on a knotty political problem.''What I want to do is to deal with the central political problem here,'' Mr. Clinton told a group of television weather forecasters on Wednesday. ''I don't mean political in terms of party politics, I mean political in how the body politic, how our society responds to this.''He also said: ''Right now, while the scientists see the train coming through the tunnel, most Americans haven't heard the whistle blowing. They don't sense that it's out there as a big issue. And I really believe as President, you know, one of my most important jobs is to tell the American people what the big issues are that we have to deal with.''To counter the Administration, its critics have mounted a $13 million advertising campaign contending that a treaty binding industrial nations to deep cuts in energy use would be unfair because it would not make the same demands on developing countries. And, they argue, such a treaty would damage the United States economy by imposing energy taxes or other punitive costs on companies that burn fossil fuels. For its own sales pitch, the White House is deploying many tools of a classic political campaign: stump speeches and photo opportunities,  the carefully staged meetings, alliances with advocacy groups, and the nearly daily events, like the meeting with the meteorologists, aimed at reaping free media coverage. The campaign began shortly after President Clinton, under pressure from environmentalists and European nations to act more aggressively, told the United Nations in June that he would marshal American public support for a treaty. He assigned Mr. Stern, an experienced White House aide, as a temporary climate ''czar'' to coordinate the Administration's efforts. Mr. Stern brought additional staff from other agencies to help out, and began laying the groundwork for Monday's high-profile public meeting. President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore also met with small groups of sympathetic business leaders, scientists and environmental advocates. Cabinet members hit the hustings, giving dozens of speeches to push the Administration's cause. On Tuesday, for example, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt told the Union of Concerned Scientists, which supports controls on greenhouse gas emissions, that success in the cause ''depends on all of us, together, taking up the burden of advocacy.''Indeed, environmental advocacy groups have been working strenuously to influence the press and the public, to mobilize their millions of members, and to persuade the Clinton Administration to call for deeper, faster cuts in greenhouse gas emissions. The scientists' group issued a call by about 1,500 scientists, including 102 Nobel laureates, more than half of all the living laureates in the sciences, urging significant cuts by industrial nations in the next few years, followed eventually by limits on the developing world. The statement called global warming ''one of the most serious threats to the planet and to future generations.''In a poll conducted in August, before the industry's ad campaign began to air, about three-quarters of registered voters surveyed said they believe that global warming is a serious problem and that a treaty with deep cuts in emissions is needed. The Mellman Group Inc. conducted the poll for the World Wildlife Fund.

When Japan was chosen as the site of this year's conference on climate change, it relished the chance to play host to a landmark meeting to help save the planet from global warming. The meeting, to be held in the ancient capital of Kyoto Dec. 1 to 10, was supposed to demonstrate Japanese leadership and to show that Japan is ready to achieve its dream of a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. But these days, some officials worry that the meeting will turn out to be not a triumph but a fiasco.''I'm very worried about it,'' said Kazuo Aichi, a former Cabinet minister who is now a pro-environment member of Parliament. ''This will be a test not only of the environment but also of Japanese diplomacy.''The problem is that the Kyoto conference was intended to be a historic convention that would commit countries to cuts in emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, which mainstream scientists believe are linked to global warming. But now that the time for sacrifice is approaching, some countries are losing their enthusiasm. There is even some possibility that Japan will preside over a conference that simply falls apart.''There is that possibility, but we would like to make utmost efforts to avoid the chance that we have no agreement at all,'' said a senior Japanese Government official involved in preparations for the meeting. Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto is caught in a double crossfire on this issue. One is the international battle over whether to require sharp cuts in emissions and if so, to whom to apply them. Any agreement that mandates sharp restrictions or places them only on industrialized countries may be torpedoed by Washington, while one that places a significant burden on poor countries may not get their backing. The other crossfire is taking place among Japanese bureaucrats, who, as usual, are telling the country's leaders what positions to adopt. The environmental agency is insisting on steep cuts in emissions, while the Ministry of International Trade and Industry says that is preposterous. Mr. Hashimoto seems to be leaning toward a compromise that would require industrialized countries to cut their carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2010 to 5 percent below their 1990 level. That is much weaker than the European proposal -- for a 15 percent cut below the 1990 level -- but it may still be tougher than the United States is willing to accept. President Clinton is convening a major conference on the issue Monday and is expected to decide on the American position later this month. Some Japanese are demanding that their Government do more to influence the United States now.''The Kyoto conference will not succeed if Japan simply watches America's reaction and follows it,'' the Asahi Shimbun, probably Japan's most influential newspaper, declared in an editorial. ''The Government should change its thinking so that it can set a higher target and lead America.''Still, Mr. Hashimoto knows that the final treaty needs America's backing to be effective. The United States produces 22 percent of the world's carbon dioxide emissions, far more than any other country.''Without the United States, we cannot make it,'' the senior official warned. ''The U.S. is vital to this negotiation, and we have to find a solution that is acceptable to it as well.''The Japanese plan that is emerging would adhere to some American suggestions that would effectively ease the burden of the cuts. For example, the treaty would allow trade in emission rights and permit developed countries to get credit for reductions that they help bring about in developing nations. The Prime Minister has yet to decide who will be the chairman of the conference, largely because of skirmishing within the bureaucracy. In the meantime, the dispute has left a vacuum in Japanese preparations. Japan saw this forum as ideal for displaying its leadership. Japan's  ''peace constitution'' rules out military leadership but Tokyo has had a long-time interest in the environment. Now, though, as the Kyoto meeting looms as a far greater challenge than was expected, it raises the risk that it will harm Japan's chance to win a seat on the Security Council. The Asahi Shimbun quoted an unnamed Cabinet minister as reflecting, ''It was from the beginning a mistake for us to take on the host nation's role.''

The debate over global warming has taken on all the characteristics of a political brawl, complete with spin doctors and aggressive advertising. A badly confused public is told one day that only a quick and dramatic reduction in energy use can avert meteorological disaster, then warned the next that any such prescription would send energy prices through the roof and the economy through the floor. If he is smart about it, President Clinton can turn this increasingly polarized argument to his advantage. Most Americans are at least vaguely aware that rising atmospheric temperatures pose real if remote threats. They are also eager to know whether there are ways to address that threat that are both effective and affordable. It is here that Mr. Clinton can make a difference, positioning himself as a moderate in a debate that has so far shed more heat than light. Between now and December, when the industrialized nations will meet in Kyoto, Japan, to negotiate  a treaty controlling emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, Mr. Clinton must devise a specific American proposal. He has already committed himself to ''realistic and binding'' limits on carbon emissions, but has not said what these targets should be and how to reach them. He is unlikely to be any more specific today in his remarks to a White House conference on global warming, a gathering aimed mainly at sharpening public awareness of the issue. But he has already sketched out four principles that will guide his Kyoto proposals. First, he believes, along with most mainstream scientists, that man-made gases produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil are contributing  to warming and that unless these gases are reduced,  bad things -- coastal flooding and widespread droughts -- are likely to occur late in the 21st century. Second,  he believes that no global emissions-control system  can succeed without the leadership of the United States, which produces one-fifth of the world's greenhouse  gases with only 5 percent of the world's population. Third, he is convinced that developing countries like India and China, which are projected to throw off huge greenhouse emissions, must be part of any global warming agreement -- if not right away, then soon. This is a contentious subject. The Europeans argue that these countries need more time to grow and cannot now be forced into an international regime. The Senate, however, has said that it will not ratify a treaty that does not bind developing countries to enforceable targets. Fourth, Mr. Clinton wants a system that will not impose intolerable strain on the American economy. He has already rejected as disingenuous (and much too expensive) a European proposal to reduce emissions 15 percent below 1990 levels by 2010. He clearly prefers a more gradual approach, and seems also to have ruled out new gasoline or carbon taxes (neither of which would fly in Congress anyway) and strong new regulations. His preferred approach is to set firm national limits on emissions and then let individual industries meet those targets using the cheapest means possible, either by switching to cleaner fuels or by making far more efficient use of energy. There is one other element to Mr. Clinton's strategy that he has not talked about, but which may well be his ace in the hole in Kyoto as he tries to draw developing countries into the mix while providing flexibility for American industries. Devised by the Environmental Defense Fund, this is an emissions-trading scheme in which rich nations that cannot meet their assigned targets without crippling taxes or investments would be able to ''buy'' pollution permits from poorer countries whose economies are so inefficient that even the tiniest adjustments can achieve big reductions in greenhouse emissions. That money, in turn, would help developing countries invest in cleaner technologies. This may not satisfy the Europeans, who find  Mr. Clinton's faith in technology and efficiency touching but unrealistic, or those economists who believe that anything short of a stiff tax on carbon-based fuels will not get the job done. But Mr. Clinton has two constituencies, one in Kyoto and the other in the Senate. If he means to win over both, a modest course may be his only course. ROBERT B. SEMPLE JR.

With President Clinton having accepted the dominant view among scientists that global warming is a serious matter, the increasingly urgent debate over what to do about it has largely shifted to the question of how restricting emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide may affect the nation's economy. And there, perplexity reigns. The future severity of climate change is uncertain enough, and its future physical impact on particular countries and regions is more so. The uncertainty multiplies yet again when people try to calculate the costs and benefits of taking action to reduce greenhouse emissions.''There's a lot more uncertainty about the economics than about the climate,'' said Dale W. Jorgenson, an economist at Harvard University who specializes in environmental questions. Carbon dioxide is produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas, which are the energy foundation of the modern economy. Some players in the debate, notably industries that produce fossil fuels or use lots of them, argue that serious economic damage would result if use of the fuels were significantly cut. Others, like environmentalists and advocates of alternatives to fossil-fuel energy, say the economy as a whole would gain because it would use energy more efficiently. In between is a range of estimates, typically based on uncertain assumptions about how various aspects of the economy would respond to cuts in the use of fossil fuel and how strategies for cutting emissions would actually work. All of this will be under the spotlight in Washington today at a daylong conference on climate change sponsored by the White House. Mr. Clinton, who plans to take part in the meeting, supports legally binding international action to cut emissions, but not at the price of harming the United States economy. He is under intensifying pressure to come up with a specific proposal for reducing emissions. The United States proposal is generally seen as critical to efforts by the nations of the world to negotiate cuts at a meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in December. It is widely expected that Mr. Clinton's proposal will be announced later this month, either just before or at a pre-Kyoto negotiating session that begins on Oct. 20 in Bonn. But as the moment of truth approaches, even some leading members of the Clinton Administration have all but thrown up their hands over the difficulty of obtaining clear answers to some crucial economic questions. Janet L. Yellen, the chairwoman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, told Congress in July that it was futile to try to develop a set of economic models that can ''give us a definitive answer as to the economic impacts of a given climate change policy.'' Computerized models are the main analytical tool  economists use.''If anybody tells you that he or she has the definitive answer as to the costs and benefits of particular climate change policies,'' Dr. Yellen said, ''I would suggest that you raise your collective eyebrows.''Can anything useful be said that might aid the search for a solution creating the least economic strain? There is general agreement that reductions of emissions would come at some cost to the economy and that the size of the cost depends largely on the size of the cuts and how rapidly they are carried out. Energy costs would very likely rise, at least for a time, and some industry sectors, it is generally agreed, could be hit hard if they were not able to adapt quickly enough. Chief among these is perhaps the coal industry; coal burning emits the most carbon dioxide per unit of energy, and the nation's utilities depend heavily on it. But many economists also say there are a number of ways to cut the costs substantially, through policy measures. One is by imposing a tax on fuels in proportion to their carbon content. The revenues from the tax would be used to reduce other Federal taxes, thus pumping money back into the economy. Many economists see a carbon tax as the most economically efficient way to reduce emissions. But any sort of energy tax is likely to face deadly opposition in the Republican Congress. So attention is focusing on another possible cost-reducing mechanism: emissions trading. In this arrangement, the Government sets an overall cap on emissions and issues permits to companies to emit carbon dioxide within that limit. Companies that find it more difficult and expensive to limit emissions could buy permits from those that find it easier and cheaper. The price of the permits is set in an open market. Proponents of this plan, now in use for industrial sulfur dioxide emissions, say it cuts overall costs significantly. But many economists argue that unless the permits are initially auctioned by the Government and the proceeds used to reduce other taxes, much of the cost-cutting benefit to the economy would be lost. The United States also favors extending the cap-and-permit idea to the international arena. Richer countries, which emit lots of carbon and would find cuts relatively expensive, could pay poorer ones, partly in technological assistance, to reduce some of theirs. Proponents of this idea say that since it would be cheaper to make cuts in developing countries, the cost both to the United States and the global economy would be lower. A third way to reduce costs, some economists say, is to allow some flexibility in the timing of reductions. They argue, for instance, that forcing industries to replace their physical plants with more energy-efficient ones before their natural economic life is over would be very expensive. A fourth cost-cutting idea, cited by environmentalists and advocates of alternative energy sources like solar and wind energy, is for government to aggressively promote the adoption of more fuel-efficient technologies. These are myriad, and range from small things like devices making it unnecessary for television sets to use power when they are off, to large things like automobiles that deliver 60 or 70 miles a gallon to ways of burning coal more efficiently. A recent study by five of the Government's national laboratories concluded that vigorous promotion of such technologies could reduce carbon emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2010 while saving enough energy to at least offset the cost of putting the technologies in place. It was the latest in a long line of studies that have come to similar conclusions; some have found, in fact, that the energy savings from new technologies would increase gross domestic product, which is the total of all goods and services produced, by 1 or 2 percent a year over the long run. Other economists, principally those who model the economy's overall operations, dispute this optimistic assessment, while acknowledging that some gains are possible through new technology.''Virtually all analysts believe that there's some low-hanging fruit out there,'' said Richard Richels, an economist at the Electric Power Research Institute, a research organization in Palo Alto, Calif., that is supported by the power industry. The disagreement, Mr. Richels said, is over how much technological fruit can be easily picked. A recent study by Robert Repetto and Duncan Austin of the World Resources Institute, an independent research group in Washington, found that such ''bottom up'' assessments as the five-laboratory study, which try to add up the expected impact on the economy from a wealth of new technologies, probably overstate the potential energy savings. But the World Resources Institute also found that some conventional ''top down'' models, which analyze the economy's overall performance, tend to overstate the costs. Typically, the top-down models say reducing emissions to 1990 levels by 2010 would trim gross domestic product by 1 or 2 percent, with some predicting much greater losses. Mr. Repetto and Mr. Austin examined 162 estimates from 16 models and found that 80 percent of their differences could be explained by what they assumed about economic uncertainties. For example, the prediction turns out more optimistically if one assumes that the economy responds relatively easily to changes in policy, that noncarbon fuels are readily available and easily adopted and that damages from air pollution and climate change are averted as a result. Opposite assumptions produce more pessimism. Predictions that a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade policy would seriously harm the economy are unrealistic, the two researchers wrote, because ''they stem from worst-case modeling assumptions.''Assessing the damages of climate change, and therefore the benefits of averting it, is perhaps the chanciest task of all, and relatively few economists have tried it. One who has, William D. Nordhaus of Yale University, says his best guess is that benefits to the overall market economy of the United States may just about balance costs over the next century. But that guess, Mr. Nordhaus said, comes ''with big uncertainties.''The most important uncertainties, said Mr. Jorgenson of Harvard, have to do with how much economic growth will take place in future decades even in the absence of any climate problem. Unlike some industry leaders, who argue that the uncertainties warrant doing nothing about emissions, Mr. Jorgenson says they are an argument for taking preventive action in the interest of future generations. But he also says he believes that the cost of reducing emissions to 1990 levels by 2010 would be too high and advocates a more modest policy. But if the policy is too modest, say many involved in the pre-Kyoto international talks, it risks losing credibility with developing countries, which have refused to undertake binding reductions until the richer nations show that they are serious. What's more, the Administration and the Senate, whose ratification would be required on any Kyoto agreement, have refused any deal that does not in some way include the poorer countries. Then there are the Europeans, who have proposed cutting emissions 15 percent below 1990 levels and are increasingly at odds with the United States over the issue. However things turn out, flesh-and-blood political realities are likely to overshadow uncertain science and economics in the diplomatic endgame at Kyoto. Warming WorldThis article is one of a series that have appeared since Aug. 12 on the science, politics and economics of climate change with the approach of an international meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in December to discuss limits on greenhouse gases.

History can be made in subtle ways, almost without anyone noticing. This happened on Monday at President Clinton's conference on global warming. The meeting was intended to build national support for some effort to reduce carbon dioxide output in the United States, a pep rally before our team heads off in December to Kyoto, Japan, for the negotiations on a treaty regulating global emissions of greenhouse gases. But behind that cheerleading, Mr. Clinton seemed to move the goalposts of the climate game in dangerous ways. Here's how the scoreboard changed:Before the Industrial Revolution, the world's air contained about 275 parts per million of carbon dioxide, the main heat-trapping gas. By now we've burned enough fossil fuel to reach 365 parts per million. We can already see the effects: higher temperatures, increased rainfall and glacial melting. But when scientists warned about the really scary probabilities -- coastal flooding, widespread drought and so on -- they always said these would happen if we didn't keep carbon dioxide from doubling, to 550 parts per million. That level was what all the greenhouse fuss was about. By Monday's gathering, however, holding carbon dioxide to a ''mere'' doubling seemed to have become our unofficial national goal. On one chart that the President's advisers kept returning to, the path of doubled carbon dioxide showed up as ''the green line'' in the graph's center -- implying that holding emissions to this level had become the new target. The line of greatest danger had shifted to 700 parts per million. In other words, the President seems to be resigned to the fate scientists once feared. It's not that the scientists have decided that a world with doubled carbon dioxide will be more benign than they thought. In fact, their predictions have grown more frightening. But holding atmospheric concentrations below a doubling would require swifter action than the President seems to back. It could still be done. Computer models show that strong global action by 2005 could stabilize the carbon dioxide level below 450 parts per million, which is still quite high but not as dangerous. But Administration economists predict such action might harm the economy as much as the oil shocks of the 1970's. Forced to choose between the chance of a recession in the next few years and the near certainty of drastic environmental change 50 years away, Mr. Clinton seems ready to side with the economists. Politics may leave him no choice. But it's a tragic change. He will no doubt claim to be choosing the middle path, but until the last few weeks that was the very route we were pledged to avoid. Bill McKibben is the author of the forthcoming ''Maybe One: A Personal and Environmental Argument for Single-Child Families.''

To the dismay of environmentalists seeking swift action to toughen the international treaty on climate change, President Clinton's senior economic and environmental advisers are urging him to delay until the year 2010 and beyond the time when the United States and other industrial nations must achieve deep new reductions in the pollution that may cause global warming. Assuming that international negotiations produce such a treaty this year to help control climate change, Mr. Clinton's advisers are warning him not to present it for the Senate's approval unless developing countries first agree, in a separate pact negotiated within the next few years, to control their own emission of greenhouse gases. The advisers' recommendations were described by leaders of several environmental organizations who said they had been briefed on the proposals. White House officials involved in the discussions today refused to discuss their recommendations, which are in an options paper that they expect to give the President as early as Friday. The options were pieced together after strenuous debate between environmental advisers and economic advisers, who expressed reservations about the potential cost of controlling emissions too quickly. Among the staff who put together the policy options are Gene Sperling, the President's economic policy assistant; Kathleen McGinty, the head of the Council on Environmental Quality; Todd Stern, a senior aide who is coordinating the policy discussions; and Lawrence Summers, the Deputy Treasury Secretary. Outside environmental advocates, including leaders of the Environmental Defense Fund, the Union of Concerned Scientists, the Sierra Club, and the Environmental Information Center, responded to what they heard by warning the White House that they would actively oppose any agreement along the lines that were being recommended.''It's clear that the President's men have blinked,'' said Carl Pope, the executive director of the Sierra Club. ''It remains to be seen if the President will blink.''Phil Clapp, executive director of the Environmental Information Center, said that for President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore to accept long delays after campaigning against global warming for years would ''create severe credibility problems for them on almost any environmental issue.''On the other hand, powerful industry groups have long urged the Clinton Administration to defer action, saying that not enough is yet known about how the climate might change to justify the potential costs in money and jobs that they contend an all out commitment to reduce emissions would require. For their part, the President's advisers say they are determined to offer a plan that is realistic politically and economically, not just attractive on the environmental merits. The most aggressive option before the President would call on industrial nations to reduce emissions of the greenhouse gases by 2010, without requiring further reductions. Other options would take even longer to stabilize emissions. In a treaty signed five years ago in Rio de Janeiro, the United States and other industrial nations said they would try to get emissions reduced, back to the level that existed in 1990, by the year 2000. Most now acknowledge they will not meet that deadline. The United States' emissions are now projected to be 13 percent above 1990 levels by 2000. Recognizing that the Rio goals were not sufficient to end the rapid accumulation of greenhouse gases that many scientists say threatens to significantly change the earth's climate in the coming century, the nations that signed that treaty have been trying for two years to negotiate a tougher pact that would set new, binding targets and timetables. The negotiations resume in Bonn on Oct. 20 and are supposed to be completed in Kyoto, Japan, in December. The recommendations to President Clinton come a few days after Japan proposed a schedule that would cut emissions 5 percent below 1990 levels by 2010. The European nations have called for reductions of 15 percent below 1990 levels by that time, and some nations have sought even deeper emissions. The White House has said it wanted to pursue reductions that would be binding, politically realistic and technically achievable. But so far it has not spelled out specific goals. One global warming expert who is close to the Administration said there are three main options on the table: one to stabilize emissions at 1990 levels by 2010, one to do so by 2015 or 2020, and one to gradually reduce the growth rate of emissions and to freeze them some day. But the environmental groups said these options do not represent a binding commitment, because they include an escape mechanism that would limit the amount of money American companies would have to spend to meet any emission targets. The Administration favors allowing companies to buy and sell emission permits for carbon dioxide, an approach that advocates say would effectively create a marketplace for pollution control ideas and help keep compliance costs down. Companies that come up with cheap controls could sell their permits for a profit. But out of fear that emissions controls would be prohibitively expensive, the Administration now is considering putting a cap on the price of the permits and guaranteeing to sell additional permits at that price.''This would spoil the market mechanism and remove the incentives to produce innovations,'' said Fred Krupp of the Environmental Defense Fund, who favors trading in emissions permits but joined other environmentalists in denouncing the White House's latest options.''That's absolutely bananas,'' retorted Raymond Kopp, an analyst at Resources for the Future, an environmental policy center that supports capping the prices of the permits. ''It is a way of capping the upper limit on the cost of any policy you might come up with.''Environmental groups who have been calling for steeper reductions on a faster timetable said that they were ''increasingly concerned'' by reports that the President's aides were recommending further delays.''Such policies would be totally inconsistent with the gravity and urgency of the global warming threat,'' said the leaders of 17 environmental organizations in a letter to Mr. Clinton written Wednesday, after White House aides informed them of the options under consideration. They said they would be ''compelled to oppose'' a policy that ''simply seeks to freeze emissions at 1990 levels by 2010 or later, or that includes a treaty-busting escape clause.''

To the Editor:Finally, President Clinton is acknowledging the overwhelming scientific support for the hypothesis that fossil fuel consumption and deforestation are changing our climate at an unprecedented rate (news article, Oct. 7). While he signals support for binding agreements at the climate treaty negotiations at Kyoto, it is disappointing that he rules out a carbon tax. Fossil fuels have been supported by many subsidies, and our atmosphere is being used as a waste dump free of charge. A carbon tax may be regressive, but this could be mitigated by payroll tax reductions  and increases in welfare payments. EDGAR HERTWICH  Berkeley, Calif., Oct. 7, 1997The writer is with the energy and resources group at the University of California at Berkeley.

FOR more than a decade, the auto industry has pretty much got what it wanted in this town. Tighter fuel standards? Forget about it. New safety standards? Small potatoes only, please. But suddenly, Detroit is finding a new reason to worry about Washington: global warming. Industry officials say there is no greater threat to the American auto industry than a concerted worldwide push to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases, the suspected culprits in long-term global climate change. Asked to rank the industry's major policy and regulatory concerns over the next few years, a senior representative of the Big Three answered, ''Global warming is No.1, and everything else is very far behind.''No, Congress has not slipped out of Republican hands, and the Sierra Club's lobbyists are still outnumbered on K Street. But Mike Stanton, the chief Washington lobbyist for the American Automobile Manufacturers Association, said the industry is watching with great trepidation as officials debate the Government's position on a proposed global climate-change treaty. With a prod from Vice President  Gore, who sounded an early alarm about possible global warming, the Administration is expected to endorse some form of binding international emissions standards when representatives of 180 nations gather in December in Kyoto, Japan, for a conference on global climate change. It is not surprising then, that when the President met with the chief executives of General Motors, Ford and Chrysler at the White House earlier this month to discuss trade policies, what he heard instead were complaints about emissions control. The Kyoto conference will lay the road map for the next five years on how the world begins to cope with carbon emissions and their effect on climate and health. The proposal that frightens auto makers most is one that will impose strict emissions standards on the developed nations but exempt the developing world, where the growth in greenhouse gas emissions is expected to be much more rapid. Carbon dioxide occurs naturally in the atmosphere, but it is also emitted by cars, factories and the burning of carbon-based fuels like oil, coal and wood. Levels of this and other greenhouse gases are rising and thought to be warming the planet by trapping sunlight that otherwise would be reflected back into space. The automobile is a chief source of these gases. To environmental advocates, it is also one of the easiest to control.''The reason they think it's such a threat is that the biggest single step we can take to prevent it is making our car go farther on a gallon of gas,'' said Dan Becker, the director of the Sierra Club's global warming and energy program. ''So we are advocating higher-mileage cars.''Mr. Becker said a car that gets 27.5 miles a gallon produces 38 tons of carbon dioxide gas over a 10-year lifetime. A 45-mile-per-gallon car emits 23 tons. That is what worries auto makers. One of their least-favorite pieces of legislation over the last 20 years is the law imposing corporate average fuel economy, or CAFE standards, forcing them to sell two or three economy cars for every low-mileage, high-profit car they produce. THERE is no known way to eliminate carbon dioxide emissions from the burning of gasoline. Mr. Stanton said there are only two ways to reduce such emissions: drive less or drive in cars that burn less gas. That means either raising gasoline prices, imposing transportation-control measures like car pooling or alternate-day driving, or raising CAFE standards. Each of these steps would impose huge costs on the industry -- and thus car buyers -- with uncertain benefits, Mr. Stanton said.''The truth of the matter is there are lots of questions on the science of global warming,'' he said. ''We don't think the state of knowledge justifies spending $200 billion to $300 billion a year to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels.''Mr. Becker scoffed. ''The industry has shown an unwillingness to improve economy without CAFE standards,'' he said. ''Our conclusion is that we can't rely on the environmental views of Detroit to improve the global warming pollution picture.''The Republican Congress has twice barred the Administration from taking steps to increase fuel efficiency standards. While the possibility of new fuel-economy rules is the industry's major concern, there are several other significant issues before Congress and the regulatory agencies. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is about to rule on consumer requests to disable air bags in cars, vans and light trucks. The agency is expected to approve on-off switches for passenger air bags that would address concerns for the safety of children, the elderly and short adults. Views are mixed within the industry, with Ford and General Motors preparing to install on-off switches for customers who ask for them, while Chrysler, Honda and others are reluctant to offer the choice of disengaging the life-saving devices. All auto makers agree that the preferable solution to the few cases of fatal air-bag deployment is not deactivation, but ''smart'' air bags with sensors that can reduce the explosive power of the bag when a seat is occupied by a child or a small adult. But auto makers are uncertain customers would be willing to pay the extra cost, about $250 a vehicle. Another issue is international trade, which is splitting auto makers and their unions, who are shoulder to shoulder against radical steps on global warming.''Trade liberalization has contributed greatly to the strong performance of the United States economy,'' said Shirley Zebroski, a senior Washington representative for G.M. ''Our focus remains on getting improved access throughout the world for our products.''The United Automobile Workers and other unions are skeptical about President Clinton's call for ''fast-track'' authority to negotiate trade agreements. They say that such deals encourage American manufacturers to build plants overseas to take advantage of lower wages and looser environmental standards. Also on Congress's auto agenda this fall is renewal of the nation's transportation financing program, the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act, better known as Istea. Senator John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, introduced the six-year, $145 billion bill in September, saying it would assure the quality and safety of the nation's roads into the next century. MR. CHAFEE said he expected the auto makers' support in getting the bill through Congress, despite the fact that it contains a number of safety and environmental provisions that will cost the industry money.''There's plenty in it for the auto companies,'' the Senator said. ''Literally billions of dollars are going to be spent making our roads even better and maintaining them, which is terribly important to them.''In summing up the political climate for the auto industry, David Cole, the director of the Office for the Study of Automotive Transportation at the University of Michigan, calls it a ''mixed bag.''''The Republicans are much more friendly to market-based approaches, rather than command and control from Washington,'' Mr. Cole said. ''For labor and the Democrats, their issue is jobs. Then there are the big regional differences, the Midwest where the plants are and the Northeast, where the pollution is.''When you look at nitty-gritty,'' he said, ''it cuts across both parties pretty evenly.''

Four years ago, President Clinton stood in the Rose Garden and declared that by the end of the decade his Administration would reverse the increase in the nation's emissions of pollutants that threaten to warm the planet's climate. On Oct. 17, 1993, as he issued a 50-point plan, the President said, ''Today, I reaffirm my personal, and announce our nation's, commitment to reducing our emissions of greenhouse gases to their 1990 levels by the year 2000.'' To skeptics who called the plan too weak, he promised periodic reviews and modifications to keep the reduction of emissions on track. Mr. Clinton's detailed promise, and how the nation is breaking it, will be at the heart of the Administration's problem this week in Bonn when representatives from around the world once again meet on the climate. They will be negotiating how quickly the industrial nations must rein in the emissions of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases that build up in the atmosphere and trap the heat of the sun. The talks are supposed to end in December in Kyoto, Japan, with a new treaty on climate change to strengthen the one most of the world's nation's agreed to in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. And while the United States has called for a binding new treaty, it is also calling for what the White House calls realistic targets and timetables for reducing emissions that cause the greenhouse effect. At the current rate of growth, the  emission of greenhouse gases by the United States will be 13 percent above the level of 1990 by the end of the decade. The Administration has indicated that it will most likely postpone until the year 2010 or beyond the goal Mr. Clinton pledged to meet by 2000. Instead of accomplishing the goal in the year Mr. Clinton leaves office, the country would have to wait until well after his successor finished a second term. The reason, many critics say, is that the Administration refused to impose mandatory measures, like requiring the fuel efficiency of automobiles to be increased, or raising energy taxes to force people to conserve fuel. Greenhouse gases come mostly form burning fossil fuels, like coal and oil, and one of the best ways to reduce their emission is to save energy.''The only thing we know for absolute certain is that voluntary programs won't work,'' said Jessica Tuchman Matthews, an environmentalist who worked for Mr. Clinton at the State Department and is president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. ''And that is progress. It was probably a stage that we had to go through.''Kathleen McGinty, the top environmental aide at the White House, cited three main reasons for the failure of the 50-point plan to achieve its goals: Congressional cuts in financing for energy conservation, the unexpectedly high rate of economic growth and fuel prices that were cheaper than anticipated. Other factors, too, helped to undermine the Administration's efforts. Congress temporarily blocked the Energy Department from issuing new energy efficiency standards for household appliances, and the department itself failed to issue new efficiency standards for electrical distribution transformers on power lines, where about 7 percent of all the nation's power simply leaks away. A proposal to label car tires so that consumers could tell which ones provided the best gasoline mileage went nowhere; the same fate awaited a tax proposal to discourage employers from subsidizing parking spaces for their employees. And forestry agencies missed the goals for planting trees, which absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as they grow. Only 70 percent of the projected reductions in greenhouse gases materialized, and even these reductions were offset when the booming economy brought a growing demand for fossil fuels. When Mr. Clinton issued his action plan four years ago, he projected that it would reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by about 109 million tons a year by 2000. That would be enough to return emissions to their 1990 level: 1.58 billion tons of carbon, an amount that had grown only slightly to 1.59 billion tons in 1992, the year before the plan was announced. Instead, the emissions in 1995 totaled 1.67 billion tons, and when the annual report for 1996 is issued later this month, it is virtually certain to show further growth. To be sure, the growth would have been even greater without the energy-saving plan. Michael Oppenheimer, a climate scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund, called the reductions achieved ''nothing to sneeze at.''''It is a very big achievement, that voluntary programs were able to do that well,'' he said. ''The trouble is, the legs were cut out from under the voluntary program. Volunteerism works a lot better when it is matched up with mandatory measures. Jawboning is going to be less effective unless there is a cap on emissions.''A report by the State Department in July predicted that if the present levels of spending on energy conservation programs are continued under the plan, the emission of greenhouse gases would exceed 2 billion tons by the year 2010 and 2.2 billion tons by 2020. So the Administration wants to impose a new cap on future greenhouse gases. Under its plan, companies would be given permits to emit greenhouse gases, but at a reduced level. Companies that can inexpensively reduce their emissions below the cap would be allowed to sell their excess permits to companies that have a harder time cutting emissions. This approach, advocates say, would drive down the overall cost of compliance while guaranteeing that the nation's emissions' goals would be met. But the utility industry, which did more than any other sector to slow the growth of emissions under the voluntary plan, opposes stricter measures.''We just have a basic disagreement,'' said Robert A. Beck, vice president for environmental affairs of the Edison Electric Institute. which represents electric companies, ''We believe you have not maximized the voluntary programs yet.''Hundreds of utilities signed up for a voluntary program called the Climate Challenge, and the steps they have promised to take are estimated to have cut 45 million tons from emissions of greenhouse gases that otherwise would have occurred by 2000. But despite those reductions, the total emissions from the utility companies nationwide are going up, not down, and many of the reductions came from actions like switching to natural gas from coal, which might have occurred anyway. Of the reductions utilities say they achieved, 30 percent came from nuclear power plants, which do not emit any polluting gases, notably the opening by a Texas utility of a nuclear power plant that was ordered decades before global warming appeared on the nation's agenda. Only 7 percent of the reduction came from renewable energy projects, for example solar and wind. In the transportation sector, which accounts for about a third of the nation's greenhouse gas emissions, the action plan offered almost no proposals to reduce emissions in the short term, and none were forthcoming. A series of negotiations among industry, environmentalists and Government officials, aimed at achieving 2 percent annual increases in automotive fuel efficiency, broke down in disagreement. Instead, the Administration is banking on long-term research into new technologies, expecting that in the decades ahead automobiles can go two or three times as far on a gallon of gas -- or some other fuel. Opposition in Congress to spending on energy conservation and renewable energy appears to be waning. Based on actions in Congress so far, it appears that spending on these areas at the Energy Department next year will grow 10 percent, to about $924 million. Although that is still less than the $1.1 billion spent in 1995, the Sustainable Energy Coalition, a group of business, consumer, environmental and policy organizations, said the shift ''reflects growing Congressional awareness that energy efficiency and renewable-energy programs offer a cost-effective solution to environmental pollution -- including global climate change.''The Administration's voluntary programs have helped demonstrate that big companies can easily adopt more lighting that uses less electricity and otherwise conserve energy in commercial buildings. But some of the most effective actions taken under the Clinton Administration's plan were not voluntary. Rather, they involved old-fashioned command and control regulations. The Environmental Protection Agency, for example, sets rules under the Clean Air Act that require large landfills to capture and burn their emissions of methane, a gas that contributes to the greenhouse effect. When the agency issued the rules in 1996, it acted more strictly than planned, and the latest estimates are that the emission of greenhouse gases will be reduced by 8 million tons by the year 2000. That is 60 percent more reductions than the original plan predicted.

As negotiations resume in Bonn on a new treaty to save the planet from global warming, the United States said today that its emissions of heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere grew last year at the highest rate since the nation pledged to cut them back. Emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases grew 3.4 percent in 1996, the latest year for which comprehensive estimates are available, the Energy Department said in a report. The department attributed the increase to strong economic growth, unusually severe weather and increased use of coal by electric utilities. Emissions from energy use in residential and commercial buildings grew 6.3 percent and 5.5 percent, respectively, despite programs intended to increase energy efficiency. At the same time, the report said, growing consumption of fuel by less efficient cars and light trucks suggests that motor vehicles may soon overtake industry as the largest source of gases suspected of causing global warming by effectively creating a greenhouse around Earth.''The economy is booming, energy prices are relatively low, and a lot of people are paying a lot less attention to energy efficiency,'' said Steven Nadel, deputy director of the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, a nonprofit research organization.''If you have unfettered energy use and big economic growth,'' Mr. Nadel said, ''it is not surprising that carbon emissions are going to increase. We need more active and aggressive policies. Laissez-faire does not work.''The report is acutely embarrassing to American negotiators at the climate talks, because the United State, with less than a 20th of the world's population, gives off almost a fourth of the gases that trap heat in the atmosphere, threatening widespread climate change. In a treaty on climate change signed by 160 nations in 1992, the United States and other industrial countries pledged to reduce their emissions of such gases to 1990's level by 2000. But American emissions in 1996 were 7.4 percent above 1990 levels, the report said. For some time the Clinton Administration has forecast that by the end of the decade, emissions of the gases in the United States will be 13 percent higher than in 1990. With the economy still growing and people driving farther in cars that use more gasoline per mile, the upward trend is widely expected to continue. The parties to the treaty are meeting in Bonn this week to try to negotiate a new, binding agreement that cuts emissions beyond 2000. The talks are supposed to conclude in December in Kyoto, Japan. European nations, saying they are well on their way to achieving the target for 2000, are pressing for deeper cuts in emissions by 2010. Emissions of carbon dioxide, the main heat-trapping gas, increased to record levels in all five sectors that the Government report tracked: residential buildings, commercial buildings, industrial sites, transportation, and electricity generation.

An American team in Bonn is deep in negotiations that, it is hoped, will lead to the signing of an international treaty on global warming in Kyoto, Japan, in December. Such a treaty would define the responsibilities of roughly 170 nations for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. President Clinton, who is scheduled to outline his policy on global warming today, must walk a fine line, balancing the concerns of environmentalists who worry about the fate of the earth and those of business and labor constituencies who worry about the fate of their companies and jobs. But on what basis should the President strike that balance? The typical economic approach to such problems is cost-benefit analysis. But there is a big problem with applying that tool here. While we have some ability to quantify the costs of policies intended to retard global warming, we have little basis for estimating the benefits. The scientific consensus takes us only so far. Yes, global warming is for real. Yes, burning fossil fuels seems to be a significant cause. And yes, most potential climatic consequences are worrisome -- and some are truly horrifying. But scientists cannot tell us how the earth's climate will change if nothing is done. So I suggest a different approach: Instead of weighing costs against benefits, it makes more sense to look at action against global warming as taking out an insurance policy. This is what homeowners do, spending hundreds of dollars every year to insure their families against the unknown, though presumably small probability that their house will burn down. Shouldn't the family of man do the same for its home? As we shop for this global insurance policy, we should seek the most economical one. We can drastically reduce its cost by applying four basic economic principles:* Market-based approaches work more efficiently than clumsy command-and-control techniques. The leading candidate in this case seems to be distributing or auctioning permits to emit, say, carbon dioxide, and then allowing free-market trading to establish their price. By now we have enough experience with emissions trading to predict that it will reduce pollution at a fraction of the cost of regulation. The President is expected to emphasize these kinds of incentives to reach his goals. It is time that the rest of the world got on board.* Global problems require global perspectives and responses. It makes sense to reduce carbon emissions where that can be done most cheaply. We should therefore explore innovations like global emissions trading and allowing American companies to ''buy'' emissions reduction in other countries, although both are fraught with practical difficulties. It is important that all countries get involved. We cannot hold developing nations to the same standards as developed ones, but their eventual participation is essential.* Haste makes waste. It's cheaper to engineer new products for energy efficiency than it is to retrofit old ones. That means we can greatly lower the costs of reducing carbon emissions if we allow our existing transportation fleet, factories, home heating systems and especially power-generating plants to wear out rather than scrapping them. We can afford such patience because it is the accumulated concentration of greenhouse gases that affects global temperatures, not the annual output of emissions. For these reasons, the much-debated target of reducing emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000, as enunciated at the 1992 summit meeting in Rio de Janeiro, is too demanding. It would be more prudent to start slowly, then gradually grow more strict. We need to emulate the tortoise, not the hare.* Reducing reliance on fossil fuels is not an anti-growth policy. It is an insurance policy against climatic disruptions that could severely damage the world's economies. We do not want people to turn off the heat and turn in their cars. We do need to make fossil fuels more expensive. But any revenues raised from, say, auctioning emissions permits should be promptly returned to the economy via tax cuts, research and development spending, and compensating victims (for example, coal miners). These four principles do not constitute an instruction manual for American negotiators in Bonn. Nonetheless, accepting them would represent a giant step toward banishing both Chicken Little and Dr. Pangloss from the debate. Then we can get down to issues like how to design and enforce a global emissions trading system in the absence of any meaningful global government, and how to persuade developing nations to participate. No, the sky is not falling; it is just filling up with greenhouse gases a bit too fast for comfort. But blithely assuming that nature and laissez-faire will take care of everything amounts to betting the earth's climate on a roll of the dice. If we lose the bet, our grandchildren will not likely forgive us. Nor should they. Alan S. Blinder, a professor of economics at Princeton, was a vice chairman of the Federal Reserve and a member of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers.

The most important thing to understand about President Clinton's speech on global warming yesterday is that he has asked the United States, a hungry producer and consumer of energy, to reverse course. He has publicly committed the country to a plan to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide, the gas mainly responsible for what could be a calamitous increase in atmospheric temperatures. He has agreed to binding targets and a timetable -- the stabilization of greenhouse gas emissions at 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012. He has proposed a system for doing so, relying largely on market mechanisms, energy efficiency and technology. His package is less than what many environmentalists had hoped for and not nearly as aggressive as the goals that some foreign countries will put on the table when the industrialized nations convene in Kyoto, Japan, in December to try to negotiate a global climate treaty. The Europeans, for example, are seeking net reductions from 1990 levels by a much earlier date, 2005. But the plan also asks American industry to make greater investments in cleaner fuels and new technologies than they have been asked to make in the past. The threat is clear. If industry does not make these investments, Mr. Clinton's successors may have to resort to far more expensive remedies to achieve the targets he has set. Indeed, there are many who argue that even Mr. Clinton's relatively modest goals cannot be met without carbon taxes that would encourage switches to cleaner fuels, or stiff new gasoline taxes that would encourage energy conservation. Mr. Clinton has rejected that course, in part because he knows it would be difficult to sell to the present Congress and in part because he believes that innovation, incentives and the free market can get the job done without serious economic turmoil. To that end, he proposes to give industries that achieve early reductions in emissions ''credits'' against the day when firm industry-by-industry emissions caps take effect. By giving extra credit to companies that lower emissions quickly, Mr. Clinton hopes to spur innovation and efficiencies and put the United States on a downward slope as early in the next century as possible. That is exactly the slope the country must be on if it is to scale back its emissions to 1990 levels. Mr. Clinton has also embraced another innovative idea that could help solve one of the most vexing problems facing the negotiators in Kyoto -- how to bring developing countries like China and India into a global system. The developing countries will not be legally bound by whatever plan is hatched in Kyoto. Mr. Clinton's idea is to entice them into the system with an international emissions trading program under which rich nations can win further credits against their targets by helping poorer nations develop advanced, and presumably cleaner, methods of producing energy. The environmentalists and the Europeans will surely press Mr. Clinton for a more accelerated timetable before his negotiators arrive in Kyoto. But that cannot obscure the fact that for the first time, a President has committed this country to changing the ways it produces and uses energy.

After two years of struggle over what to do about global warming, the Clinton Administration and the developing countries in the global game of greenhouse politics have put their cards on the table, and negotiations have at last begun in earnest. The talks ''have come alight, and not a moment too soon,'' said Michael Zammit Cutajar of Malta, the executive secretary of the United Nations body that administers the 1992 treaty on climate change. Delegates from 150 countries are gathered here to discuss possible revisions to the treaty, in the last of eight negotiating sessions leading up to a final session in Kyoto, Japan, in December. The American plan, announced today by President Clinton in Washington, represents the low-ball bid. Mr. Clinton called for stabilizing industrialized countries' emissions of heat-trapping gases at 1990 levels by about 2010, with a modest reduction below 1990 levels by about 2020. A sharply contrasting proposal, presented formally today by the developing countries and China, calls for the rich countries to cut their emissions by 7.5 percent below 1990 levels by 2005, 15 percent by 2010 and 35 percent by 2020. An agreement in Kyoto, should one be reached, apparently lies somewhere between the two boundaries set by the United States and the Group of 77 Plus China, as the developing countries call themselves. With today's announcements, the negotiating ''universe'' has been firmly delineated for the first time. Under the 1992 treaty, the developing countries are explicitly exempted from undertaking any specific commitments, and they have steadfastly maintained that they will not agree to do so unless the rich nations demonstrate convincingly that they are serious about taking the lead. The rationale is that since the industrialized countries are the biggest emitters of the gases and got rich by emitting them, they should take the first steps toward reduction. While agreeing that the developed countries should take the lead, President Clinton reasserted today the United States position that the poorer countries must be part of any negotiated solution. The poorer countries' emissions are expected to exceed those of the developed world within two or three decades. Two of the largest of them, China and India, have abundant reserves of coal, the most troublesome fossil fuel in terms of emitting heat-trapping, or greenhouse, gases. Global warming occurs when such gases, chiefly carbon dioxide, accumulate in the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is produced by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas, the energy underpinnings of the global economy. But the United States is the world's major producer of greenhouse gases, and the American proposal has been deemed critical for the success of the talks. For two days, the delegates gathering at the Beethoven Halle opera house on the Rhine have been anxiously awaiting the American proposal. As details began filtering out of Washington, some reactions were predictable. An important delegate from the European Union, which favors a 15 percent reduction in emissions by 2010, said he ''looked at the figures, and. . . .'' He made a dismissive gesture. But some industry representatives considered the proposal quite ambitious. ''This will be a tremendous cut,'' said Gail McDonald, president of the Global Climate Coalition, an  industry group in Washington. ''It's a very aggressive target.''To Raul Estrada-Oyuela of Argentina, the chairman of the Bonn talks, the Clinton proposal was ''really modest; we were waiting for a bigger effort.'' But, he said tonight after watching Mr. Clinton's speech outlining the proposals, ''it's encouraging that the President of the United States takes the issue so seriously.''To some delegates, the American proposal looked puny because the 1992 treaty already obligates rich countries to aim at capping emissions at 1990 levels in 2000. Instead, United States emissions in 2000 are expected to be 13 percent higher than they were in 1990. Some European Union officials say the Europeans as a group will meet the goal.''It seems to me that the United States proposal is even less'' than what was originally contained in the treaty, since it would delay the 1990 stabilization goal by 10 years, said Dr. Mark Mwandosya of Tanzania, the chairman of the developing country caucus in the talks. But there is another way of looking at what the American proposal would mean. Even before its features were known, Mr. Zammit Cutajar had pointed out that 1990 was not a magic number. The way to measure a proposal, he said, is by gauging what it would actually mean in emissions terms. By that standard, the  United States would reduce its emissions about 25 percent from where it would otherwise be around 2010, the Administration said.''It would be, admittedly,'' said Dr. Mwandosya, especially since the United States is the biggest emitter of carbon dioxide in the world. ''But is it enough to pull the rest of the world toward stabilization of concentrations? I don't think it is.'' Others noted that the United States target and timetable would require countries already below or approaching 1990 levels to do little or nothing. Everyone agrees that it will eventually be necessary to reduce emissions well below 1990 levels if concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are to be stabilized. This is because 1990 levels were already too high; the overall concentration of gases in the atmosphere keeps going up at that level of emissions. Correction:  October 27, 1997, MondayA listing on Thursday of proposals to limit emissions of gases that cause global warming misstated the one offered by Japan. It would cut yearly average emissions from 2008 to 2012 by 5 percent below 1990 levels, not return them to 1990 levels. Correction: October 27, 1997, MondayA listing on Thursday of proposals to limit emissions of gases that cause global warming misstated the one offered by Japan. It would cut yearly average emissions from 2008 to 2012 by 5 percent below 1990 levels, not return them to 1990 levels.

Following is an excerpt from remarks by President Clinton today to the National Geographic Society on the proposal for stabilizing industrialized nations' release of gases that may cause global warming, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a private transcription company:The vast majority of the world's climate scientists have concluded that if the countries of the world do not work together to cut the emission of greenhouse gases, then temperatures will rise and will disrupt the climate. In fact, most scientists say the process has already begun. Disruptive weather events are increasing. Disease-bearing insects are moving to areas that used to be too cold for them. Average temperatures are rising.  Glacial formations are receding. Scientists don't yet know what the precise consequences will be, but we do know enough now to know that the Industrial Age has dramatically increased greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, where they take a century or more to dissipate and that the process must be slowed, then stopped, then reduced if we want to continue our economic progress and preserve the quality of life in the United States and throughout our planet. We know what we have to do. Greenhouse gas emissions are caused mostly by the inefficient burning of coal or oil for energy. Roughly a third of these emissions come from industry, a third from transportation, a third from residential and commercial buildings. In each case, the conversion of fuel to energy use is extremely inefficient and could be made much cleaner with existing technologies or those already on the horizon, in ways that will not weaken the economy but in fact will add to our strength in new businesses and new jobs. If we do this properly, we will not jeopardize our prosperity; we will increase it. With that principle in mind, I'm announcing the instruction I am giving to our negotiators as they pursue a realistic and effective international climate change treaty. And I'm announcing a far-reaching proposal that provides flexible, market-based and cost-effective ways to achieve meaningful reductions here in America. I want to emphasize that we cannot wait until the treaty is negotiated and ratified to act. The United States has less than 5 percent of the world's people, enjoys 22 percent of the world's wealth, but emits more than 25 percent of the world's greenhouse gases. We must begin now to take out our insurance policy on the future. In the international climate negotiations the United States will pursue a comprehensive framework that includes three elements, which taken together will enable us to build a strong and robust global agreement. First, the United States proposes at Kyoto that we commit to the binding and realistic target of returning to emissions of 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012. And we should not stop there. We should commit to reduce emissions below 1990 levels and the five-year period thereafter, and we must work toward further reductions in the years ahead. The industrialized nations tried to reduce emissions to 1990 levels once before with a voluntary approach, but regrettably most of us, including especially the United States, fell short. We must find new resolve to achieve these reductions. And to do that we simply must commit to binding limits. Second, we will embrace flexible mechanisms for meeting these limits. We propose an innovative joint implementation system that allows a firm in one country to invest in a project that reduces emissions in another country and receive credit for those reductions at home. And we propose an international system of emissions trading. These innovations will cut worldwide pollution, keep costs low and help developing countries protect their environment, too, without sacrificing their economic growth. Third, both industrialized and developing countries must participate in meeting the challenge of climate change. The industrialized world must lead, but developing countries also must be engaged. The United States will not assume binding obligations unless key developing nations meaningfully participate in this effort. As President Carlos Menem stated forcefully last week when I visited him in Argentina, a global problem such as climate change requires a global answer. If the entire industrialized world reduces emissions over the next several decades, but emissions from the developing world continue to grow at their current pace, concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will continue to climb. Developing countries have an opportunity to chart a different energy future, consistent with their growth potential and their legitimate economic aspirations. What Argentina, with dramatic projected economic growth, recognizes is true for other countries as well. We can and we must work together on this problem in a way that benefits us all. Here at home, we must move forward by unleashing the full power of free markets and technological innovations to meet the challenge of climate change. I propose a sweeping plan to provide incentives and lift roadblocks to help our companies and our citizens find new and creative ways of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

President Clinton today outlined a moderate program to fight global warming, saying that it would be painless and even economically beneficial but that it must be carried out quickly to be effective. The plan would rely on tax credits and research subsidies to encourage the conservation of energy in the next few years. It would also give American companies extra credit for moving more quickly than required to cut their emissions of atmospheric pollutants that trap the sun's heat and threaten to alter the planet's climate. But it would not reduce emissions to the 1990 benchmark until some time between 2008 and 2012. Further, unspecified reductions would follow.''We have a clear responsibility and a golden opportunity to conquer one of the most important challenges of the 21st century, the challenge of climate change, with an environmentally sound and economically strong strategy,'' Mr. Clinton said in a speech at the National Geographic Society here. ''If we do not change our course now, the consequences, sooner or later, will be destructive for America and for the world.''But the plan was quickly denounced by many of the other nations that are trying to negotiate a new climate treaty. At a negotiating session in Bonn, they said that as the largest single emitter of heat-trapping, or greenhouse, gases, the United States should be doing more and doing it sooner. [Page A20].In the negotiations, parties to the 1992 treaty on climate change that was signed by 160 nations in Rio de Janeiro are seeking to strengthen its terms. The treaty called on industrial nations to cut their emissions to 1990's levels by the year 2000. Most industrial nations, including the United States, are falling short of that target, and Mr. Clinton's plan defers it for many years. Under the Clinton Administration's plan for meeting the new targets of a binding treaty, the United States Government would wait until 2008 before fully establishing fixed caps on industrial sources of greenhouse gases, mainly the carbon dioxide that comes from burning fossil fuels. And only then, consequently, would energy prices have to increase to reflect the costs of mandatory emission reductions. The Administration, in effect, is laying a heavy bet that innovation and the free market, driven by a few billion dollars of tax incentives and subsidies, will drive down fuel use in the next few years without causing any serious economic disruption. This approach would therefore demonstrate the feasibility of deeper reductions that would come later. Mr. Clinton, who since his first campaign for the Presidency has pledged aggressive action to fight global warming and who criticized President George Bush for not supporting the 1992 Rio treaty on climate change, found himself the target of the same kind of criticism today, but from other countries.''It seems to me that the United States proposal is even less'' than what was originally in the treaty, said Dr. Mark Mwandosya of Tanzania, the chairman of the developing-countries' caucus in the talks. But Mr. Clinton described his strategy as ''realistic and effective.''''This plan is sensible and sound,'' he said, acknowledging the criticisms that erupted even before he began to speak. ''Since it's a long-term problem requiring a long-term solution, it will be phased in over time. But we want to get moving now.''The President emphasized his optimism about technology as he stood framed by the National Geographic Society's logo, as an explorer might be pictured on the cover of the National Geographic magazine, and not a President defending a position attacked by environmental groups. His plan, he promised, would ''create a wealth of new opportunities for entrepreneurs at home, uphold our leadership abroad, and harness the power of free markets to free our planet from an unacceptable risk.''He said that even before a new treaty was negotiated and ratified, the United States would take new steps to put itself on an energy diet with a prescription that in the next few years would emphasize incentives, subsidies, Federal procurement policies and rewards for those who move the fastest to adopt promising new technologies. The proposal is less ambitious than the approaches sought by Japan, Europe or many developing countries to control the buildup of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. They all want the industrial nations to agree to deeper and earlier cuts in a new treaty that is supposed to be concluded in Kyoto, Japan, in December. Mr. Clinton also declared that the United States would not accept binding commitments negotiated in Kyoto unless important developing countries also agreed to join the worldwide effort to reduce emissions. Most environmental organizations denounced the Clinton plan as too weak, although some praised the President's call for early actions. Most big industry groups rejected the plan as too costly, although some said they liked the incentives it promoted.''The United States is the only country dragging its feet,'' said Phil Clapp, the executive director of the Environmental Information Center, an advocacy group. ''Unless he is willing to take a stronger position in Kyoto, the Clinton-Gore Administration will be responsible for the collapse of the talks.''But Michael Oppenheimer, senior scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund, said: ''For the first time there is a good chance for a constructive outcome at Kyoto. One of the major defects in the plan is that it is not aggressive enough in the longer term. But the early reductions are extremely important, because they could get U.S. emissions under control. Emissions are basically exploding at this point.''Thomas J. Donohue, the president of the United States Chamber of Commerce, said his business federation would oppose the proposed emission-trading scheme that is at the heart of the Administration's plan.''Capping emissions amounts to energy rationing, which drives up consumer costs as effectively as higher energy taxes,'' Mr. Donohue said. But Michael Marvin, the executive director of the Business Council for Sustainable Energy, said, ''It is what we have advocated from the beginning: clear, modest steps to get us back to 1990.''''Mr. Marvin, whose group represents companies including appliance manufacturers and purveyors of clean fuels, renewable energy, and conservation technologies, added: ''It is an important step. In an ideal world, we would have argued for an earlier timetable earlier. But this puts the U.S. in the ball park and is a defensible, negotiable position.''Like the targets and timetables that Mr. Clinton proposed, the package of incentives is relatively modest. The $5 billion in tax cuts and research subsidies over five years would amount to a bit more than a penny per hundred dollars of economic activity -- $1 billion annually in a $7 trillion economy. Looked at another way, it would be enough to give every citizen an annual rebate covering one-fourth of the cost of a high-efficiency light bulb. Any treaty would require approval from two-thirds of the Senate, and some elements of Mr. Clinton's plan would have to be written into law by Congress, where there is considerable resistance to his approach.

If President Clinton has his way, rights to spew carbon dioxide into the atmosphere will eventually be traded by energy producers, utilities and even investors on exchanges the way pork bellies, German marks and interest rate futures change hands today. While the Administration's plan for curtailing greenhouse gases -- announced Wednesday in preparation for the world climate change talks in Kyoto, Japan, in December -- demands no immediate action by businesses, it confirms that a system of tradable emissions permits will figure prominently in any long-term effort to control pollutants. Such a system, already being used under the Clean Air Act of 1990 to cut sulfur emissions, would allow companies that voluntarily reduce emissions below a certain level to sell the difference to others as unused ''rights'' to pollute. The reliance on free markets in reducing carbon emissions to 1990 levels has been greeted with enthusiasm by specialists who have long argued that managing the task with traditional regulation would be hugely wasteful.''An approach that promises to reduce the cost of containment by 90 percent is certainly worth a try,'' said Richard Richels of the Electric Power Research Institute in California. But many economists caution that emissions trading is no panacea. They emphasize the desirability of bringing developing countries into the trading systems as soon as possible and the need for care in designing the control mechanisms that will redirect billions or even trillions of dollars in pollution-control investments worldwide.''At this point, the learning is more important than the doing,'' suggested Robert Hahn of the American Enterprise Institute, a research group in Washington. The Administration's plan has been criticized by many foreign governments that will also attend the Kyoto conference, where the participants will try to work out a global climate treaty. The critics say the American plan is not aggressive enough because it would not roll back emissions to 1990 levels until sometime between 2008 and 2012. Whatever happens in Kyoto, Mr. Clinton seems committed to emissions trading. It is no secret why: It costs less and keeps Big Brother in the background. To date, the most ambitious use of tradable permits has been in containing the sulfur emissions from power plants that contribute to acid rain. Under the Clean Air Act, total sulfur emissions were capped by giving electric utilities rights to emit sulfur roughly in proportion to their lower, 1980 emissions levels. Companies that reduce emissions below their allowance by closing plants, switching fuels or attaching chemical scrubbers to their smokestacks are free to sell their surplus pollution rights, while others are free to exceed their limits by buying those rights. The market for sulfur emissions has flourished as utilities with low-cost sources of clean fuel have found it profitable to operate within the Government standards and sell part of their allotments to pollute. Last year, the market price of sulfur allowances averaged just more than $100 a ton.''Emissions have been reduced at a cost far lower than the most optimistic forecasts,'' said Richard Sandor, the chief executive of Centre Financial Products and vice chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade. Some economists are confident that similar serendipities await a trading system for carbon dioxide and perhaps other greenhouse gases. Global warming occurs when such gases accumulate in the atmosphere, trapping heat.''Since none of the effect is localized, carbon is a perfect pollutant for emissions trading,'' argued Dan Dudek, an economist at the Environmental Defense Fund who was instrumental in pushing through the sulfur program in 1990. But many a slip is possible between cup and lip. For one thing, the scale would be much larger. A few hundred utilities with a few thousand power plants emit most of the sulfur regulated under the Clean Air Act. Carbon dioxide, however, comes not only from power plants but also from hundreds of millions of boilers and vehicles, which could not possibly be monitored like electric utilities. That suggests the need for a different approach, says Robert Stavins, an economist at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government. He suggests that producers of coal, oil and natural gas be required to obtain emissions permits equal to the carbon content of their products rather than putting the burden on fuel consumers. Limits on volumes that could be sold would raise the competitive price of all carbon fuels. But because coal emits more carbon dioxide for every unit of heat than natural gas, the price of coal would rise far more than the price of gas. That would give utilities an incentive to abandon coal. Under the sulfur trading system, electric utilities receive roughly $1 billion (at current trading prices) worth of permits free each year -- a large but not overwhelming benefit to a $100 billion industry. And because utilities are regulated by the states, virtually all of the saving is passed on to rate payers. By contrast, if fossil-fuel producers received free carbon permits, there is no reason to think that the windfall, which could measure in the tens of billions of dollars annually, would go to consumers. The Government would, in theory, have the option of auctioning carbon emissions permits rather than giving them away. But the political battle over limiting emissions is likely to be fierce: reducing carbon output to 1990 levels, for example, would almost certainly require phasing out coal as a boiler fuel within a few decades. Thus, while economists see merit in auctioning permits and using the proceeds to cut other taxes, coal producers and their unions would most likely work aggressively to block legislation that did not give them a big piece of the action. The potential gains from international trading of carbon emissions permits are even greater than from domestic trading. While the industrialized world has a multitrillion-dollar investment in boilers and engines that would have to be scrapped rapidly to reach 1990 emissions levels, the third world has opportunities galore for easy carbon conservation. Buildings have not been insulated; industrial boilers have not been retrofitted with efficient combustion systems. Most important, rapidly growing economies -- notably China -- have yet to sink huge sums in modern coal-fired boilers or fuel-hogging vehicles. Opportunities to weaken the link between economic growth and carbon emissions are complemented by opportunities to preserve natural carbon ''sinks'' -- vast inventories of carbon stored in trees. Two big utilities, American Electric Power and Pacificorp, along with British Petroleum, are experimenting with a program to spare five million acres of forest in Bolivia from logging in what amounts to an act of philanthropy. The estimated cost of sequestering a ton of carbon this way is just 37 cents, less than 1 percent of the cost of many emissions-reducing industrial projects contemplated for Europe and North America. The intuition that the greatest opportunities are in poor countries is borne out by computer simulations. William Nordhaus of Yale University estimates that the cost of meeting the developed world's commitment to getting back to 1990 emissions levels would be cut by at least 85 percent if the containment largely consisted of paying developing countries to adopt a carbon-lean growth strategy. A strategy that used international trading to focus on containing carbon emissions in developing countries would also pay local dividends, such as reducing urban pollution. ''Increasing fuel efficiency and switching to natural gas would incidentally mean lower levels of smog, which now threatens health in virtually all the big cities,'' notes Mr. Dudek of the Environmental Defense Fund. Unfortunately, the difficulties in creating and enforcing a trading system that crosses borders are formidable, beginning with the problem of apportioning the initial obligations to contain carbon. The European Community wants to start from a 1990 emissions base line, which would cost it little because Europe would receive credit for the conversion of Britain and eastern Germany from coal to natural gas in the 1990's. Meanwhile, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia and most of the rest of the third world want controls to kick in only when their per capita emissions have reached parity with the West -- a formula for doing nothing until the middle of the next century. Thomas Schelling, an economist at the University of Maryland's School of Public Policy, emphasizes the distinction between making promises to reduce emissions by some amount at a certain date and translating talk into action. ''Global emissions trading is an elegant idea,'' he said, ''but I cannot seriously envision national representatives sitting down to divide up rights in perpetuity worth a trillion dollars.''That explains why President Clinton, who on Wednesday reaffirmed that ''developing countries must participate in meeting the challenge of climate change,'' seems willing to fudge the issue for a while by encouraging voluntary investment of American cash and technology in third world efforts to contain emissions. The American Electric Power-British Petroleum forest preservation project in Bolivia fits the model well. And Mr. Clinton is apparently planning to bolster such voluntary efforts by guaranteeing participants credits against mandatory emissions limitations highly likely to be imposed after 2008. But Mr. Stavins of Harvard argues that monitoring such deals is bound to be problematic. Apart from the practical issues of insuring compliance in countries with inadequate infrastructure, corrupt governments and courts unwilling to enforce contracts, he is concerned that in agreements between companies, ''both parties will have powerful incentives to exaggerate the gains.''American policy makers thus face some difficult issues. Market-based strategies to contain global warming promise far more bang for a buck than traditional regulation. But carrying out such efforts poses new problems that engender skepticism, even among free-market advocates. ''We just have not thought through the mechanics of international trading,'' argued Mr. Nordhaus of Yale. That is why many economists and some environmentalists are quietly pleased with the part of the Administration's plan that would delay mandatory market-based limitations for another decade.''If it's worth doing,'' argued Paul Portney, president of Resources for the Future in Washington, ''surely it's worth waiting long enough to do the job right.''

Imagine a nuclear arms reduction treaty in which three nuclear powers -- say, Russia, France and China -- committed to no specific reductions while other nations disarmed. It seems absurd. Now imagine negotiating a global climate change treaty to reduce carbon emissions, but with no specific commitments from 3 of the 10 biggest carbon producers, and without even a clear global target. It seems equally absurd. Clearly this is the view of the Senate, which in late July passed a resolution by a 95 to 0 vote stating that the United States should not sign any climate change agreement unless it ''mandates new specific scheduled commitments to limit or reduce greenhouse emissions for [developing countries and] would not result in serious harm to the economy.''Frankly, even if these conditions are met, the President should sign no treaty. Whether humans are influencing the climate is unknown. Despite the mantra from the Clinton Administration that the science is settled, it is not. The May issue of Science magazine made this clear. So too did the Heidelberg Appeal, a petition signed by hundreds of distinguished scientists urging against precipitous action. Bert Bolin, who directed the United Nations scientific report on the issue, disagrees with President Clinton's and Vice President Gore's belief that climate change is causing more violent and unpredictable weather. This year, even the Sierra Club's conservation director, Bruce Hamilton, admitted, ''If you look at the science, it's all over the board.''But even if you buy the premise behind global warming, this treaty is indefensible. A ''global'' warming treaty is no such thing if it omits developing nations where most growth in emissions will take place. This includes China, Brazil, Mexico, South Korea and other developing nations, which are expected to produce 60 percent of global carbon emissions in the next few decades. In fact, China is expected to become the biggest carbon producer on the planet. By failing to include developing nations, we are working against the very purpose of a treaty intended to address the worrisome potential problems of global warming. Yet the Clinton Administration seems to be pursuing just such an agreement in the negotiations leading up to December's international global climate change meeting in Kyoto, Japan. In his recent speech outlining his position, the President said the ''United States will not assume binding obligations unless key developing nations meaningfully participate in this effort.'' But what does ''key'' mean? Does the President intend to sign a treaty that does not include other nations, say, China, Brazil or Mexico? If so, he should say so. Moreover, with the December treaty deadline fast approaching, our Government has not conducted its own thorough analyses of the treaty's impact on the American economy nor has it embraced any of the many macroeconomic studies already produced. How can such far-reaching policy be negotiated without a thorough examination of the treaty's effects on the economy, American workers and communities? How can we find solutions that protect workers and communities without first identifying specific global goals? How can we protect ourselves from economic upheaval without honest public analysis of the economic impact associated with the lower carbon emission plan that would be imposed? We have hard work to do before we make hasty agreements. As Bill Cunningham, a spokesman for the A.F.L.-C.I.O., noted in a statement delivered last March:''Let there be no mistake, whatever happens with respect to greenhouse, it will be working people who finally pay most of the cost. Whatever taxes governments raise, whatever regulation they impose, whatever measures business introduces -- it will be working people who finally must implement the changes and pay much of the cost.''Taking time to act intelligently will serve us all better than trying to live with a flawed agreement. Jack Kemp is a co-chairman of the Alexis de Tocqueville Institution and a co-director of Empower America.

Delegates from 143 countries ended their preliminary talks on global warming here today with no agreement on key issues and growing concern about the prospect for success at the concluding meeting, to be held in Kyoto, Japan, in early December. The United States' long-awaited proposal for cutting emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases has been scornfully attacked as too weak by delegates and environmentalists from around the world. And there is no sign that American negotiators are about to yield. Still, the Americans themselves said there was more than a little cause for hope, and they have been lobbying their counterparts here, urging them to take a closer look at the American proposal. Meanwhile, several small-scale but higher-level meetings will be held between now and Dec. 1, when the Kyoto conference begins. The goal of the conference is to revise the climate treaty negotiated in Rio in 1992, which set voluntary limits on emissions.''There are enough ideas out there to have an agreement,'' a senior State Department official said here, speaking on condition of anonymity.  ''We just don't see all the kinds of coalescence that you need yet'' for that to happen. On the surface, the American proposal looks like the weakest on the table. The proposal would require industrialized countries to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases to 1990 levels in the period 2008 to 2012. By contrast, the European Union wants to cut emissions 15 percent below 1990 levels by 2010. But the American official said that the American plan compares more favorably with other countries' positions once the details are inspected, and that it is superior to a major alternative plan advanced by Japan. Japan calls for a 2.5 percent to 5 percent reduction in emissions by about 2010. Other American officials here today released an analysis by the Department of Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency which suggests that the American position actually occupies a middle ground between those of Japan and the European Union. The contention is based mainly on the fact that under the United States' proposal, emissions of a full array of six different greenhouse gases would be controlled. The other proposals would control only three. Some critics said the the American estimate that its plan occupies the middle ground were based on uncertain projections of future emissions of the less abundant gases. The Administration countered that even if the projections of future emissions are cut in half, the basic conclusion still holds. The conclusion is ''a valid point,'' said Dr. Daniel Lashof, a scientist with the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group. ''I think the U.S. proposal is stronger than the Japanese position, but it still falls short'' of the European position. With the Bonn phase of the talks over, key players must ''review their options so that they can come to Kyoto with more flexible positions,'' said Michael Zammit Cutajar, the executive director of a 1992 climate treaty under which the discussions are proceeding. The State Department official, however, said that ''before we start perhaps working toward any compromises, we want to be sure that people understand'' the full scope of Washington's position. It may be, said Mr. Zammit Cutajar, that the Kyoto session will produce ''an agreement based not on a single target, but on different targets for each country.'' The individual targets for emissions cuts would be based on an array of economic and social characteristics. The possibility of differentiated targets received much attention here over the last few days. Talks between now and the Kyoto conference are to take place in a number of forums and through a number of channels, some of them at higher levels, between now and the start of the Kyoto conference on Dec. 1. Among the forums coming up is a meeting involving ministers from key countries in Tokyo Nov. 8 through 10. The American official said there was ''great scope'' for resolving many issues before the Kyoto talks begin. Aside from the question of what cuts in emissions industrialized countries will make, and when, the biggest outstanding issue is the role of developing countries. While the 1992 Rio climate treaty generally requires them to control their emissions, it does not bind them to any specific commitments. The rationale is that since the richer countries are responsible for most of the greenhouse gas emissions so far, they should take the lead in reducing them. The negotiators in Bonn had no authority to consider new commitments for the developing world. But the Kyoto meeting involves a higher-level conference of parties to the 1992 treaty, and it can take up the issue. The United States has insisted it will sign no agreement in Kyoto that does not include ''meaningful'' participation by the developing countries. Everyone agrees that eventually, the poorer nations will have to take on specific commitments if greenhouse gases are to be controlled, since their emissions are expected to surpass those of the industrialized world in the early decades of the next century.''If all the industrialized countries shut down their economies, it wouldn't solve the problem,'' said Bert Metz, a prominent European negotiator from the Netherlands. But the issue of the developing countries' future role has proved intractable so far. In part, that is because these countries argue that the industrialized countries have become rich through a century of increasing emission of greenhouse gases. They argue that initially, the rich countries should bear most of the burden of preventing climate change. The American diplomat here said that since the issue is so difficult, it may be possible to resolve only part of it in Kyoto, with negotiations continuing beyond that. The Clinton Administration says that under its proposal to include all six greenhouse gases, total greenhouse emissions in the United States would be reduced by some 30 percent from what they would otherwise be around 2010. The most important of the six heat-trapping gases is carbon dioxide, which is produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas. The others are methane, which forms in landfills and is emitted in part as waste natural gas, and nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexachloride, which are produced by a variety of industrial processes and have a variety of uses.

Climate experts have warned for years that a doubling of heat-trapping carbon dioxide in the atmosphere could have serious consequences worldwide. Now a growing number of scientists and policy makers say it will be difficult if not impossible to avoid such a rise. The reason, they say, is that the world's economic and political systems cannot depart from business as usual rapidly enough. In one metaphor that acquired some currency at talks on global warming, which ended inconclusively here on Friday, it is like trying to turn a supertanker in a sea of syrup. Carbon dioxide is emitted by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas. These fuels are an integral part of the modern economy, and weaning the world from them has always been acknowledged as a difficult task at best. In the long debate about global warming, a doubling of carbon dioxide from pre-industrial levels in the 19th century has been such a frequent object of analysis and anxiety as to become almost a talismanic benchmark. Mainstream climatologists say that such a doubling would raise the average surface temperature of the globe anywhere from a moderate 3 degrees Fahrenheit to a potentially catastrophic 8 degrees, disrupting the earth's climate and causing the seas to rise. By comparison, the world has warmed by 5 to 9 degrees since the depths of the last ice age, about 18,000 to 22,000 years ago. While there are dissenters, a growing number of scientists and policy makers now say a doubling may be unavoidable late in the next century. This is so, they say, despite whatever steps to limit emissions of the gases emerge from international talks that were held here and will conclude in Kyoto, Japan, in early December. For the most part, attention until now has focused on the next two decades or so, in the belief that the most important thing is to make a start in reducing emissions. But it is widely agreed, based on proposals on the table, that any action emerging from Kyoto would be insufficient to prevent an eventual doubling of greenhouse gases. The proposals outline a range of relatively modest reductions by industrialized countries, none of which are enough to prevent overall atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide from continuing to rise.''What Kyoto will do, almost predictably, is produce a small decrease in the rate of increase,'' said Dr. Jerry Mahlman, director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Geophysical Dynamics Laboratory at Princeton University. The Kyoto conference has been universally viewed as a first step, and doubts about the long term are forcing people to pay more attention to a basic but long-deferred policy question: what should be the ultimate goal in stabilizing carbon dioxide concentrations? One objective of President Clinton's climate plan, announced Oct. 22, is to establish a scientifically sound goal with the assistance of the National Academy of Sciences. But if the experts' new fears are borne out, a rough doubling of carbon dioxide concentrations, or perhaps a bit less, may be the best to which the world can aspire. Under the most likely outcome, this could mean a rise in sea levels that would inundate low-lying coastal areas and small island nations, more frequent and severe floods and droughts, a shift in climatic zones, and disruption of natural ecosystems. Not everyone agrees that a doubling is inevitable. Environmentalists say it is possible and necessary to stabilize concentrations at 450 parts per million by volume -- about one and a half times the pre-industrial concentration of 280 parts per million. This, according to a study by the Environmental Defense Fund, would limit the global temperature increase to 1.5 to 2 degrees Fahrenheit during the next 100 years. The estimate assumes that the climate's sensitivity to carbon dioxide is in the middle of the range implied by mainstream scientists' conclusion that a doubling would produce a warming of 3 to 8 degrees. Atmospheric carbon dioxide is now about 360 parts per million, and the average surface temperature of the globe has risen by about 1 degree during the last century. At 450 parts per million, if the environmentalists are right, the total temperature increase by 2100 would be about 2.5 to 3 degrees. This would still make the world warmer than at any time in the last 10,000 years, and some further warming would occur after 2100. Virtually nobody believes that it is possible to stabilize atmospheric concentrations below 450 parts per million, and a number of experts say it will be very difficult if not impossible to stabilize them even at 550 parts per million, the next plateau on which some policy makers are beginning to focus. That number is close to a doubling of the pre-industrial concentration. While it is physically possible to stabilize concentrations at 550 parts per million, ''I don't think the emissions levels it would take are possible from a political point of view,'' said Dr. Luiz Gylvan Meira Filho of Brazil, who is in the thick of the political battle and the scientific debate. In the talks leading up to the Kyoto conference, he has headed the crucial negotiating subgroup dealing with targets and timetables for emissions reductions. A physicist, he is also a vice chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which produces the world's most authoritative assessments of the global warming problem. He said he was speaking for himself, not any of the official groups. Many others share Dr. Meira's assessment in general. It will be ''clearly challenging to stay below 550,'' said David Sandalow, a member of the Clinton Administration's National Security Council and Council on Environmental Quality. Dr. Kevin Trenberth, a climate scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., says there has been a general sense that ''if we want to stop this experiment, we can do so with really strong, willful action.''''I think that's not the case,'' he said, adding that a doubling of carbon dioxide is likely, and that ''we need to pay more attention to adapting to climate change.''What appears to be going on is ''a subtle shift in the declaration of what constitutes success,'' said Dr. Mahlman. It looks now, he said, as if the long-term task is to keep atmospheric carbon dioxide from soaring beyond a doubling to catastrophic levels of as much as three or four times pre-industrial concentrations. Concentrations could as much as triple by 2100 and continue growing after that if third world countries follow business as usual, even if the most ambitious emissions reduction proposals for rich countries were adopted, said a report made public here by the intergovernmental panel. As is true of any climate problem, uncertainty permeates the question of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations. There is uncertainty not only in how much warming a given concentration of carbon dioxide would produce, but also in estimates of how the world's supply of carbon is recycled continuously among the atmosphere, the oceans, animals, plants, microbes and sedimentary rocks. Forecasting the nature of the  economy 100 or even 50 years from now is also difficult. Dr. Michael Oppenheimer, an atmospheric scientist with the Environmental Defense Fund, argues that ''it's premature to give up'' on the goal of 450 parts per million.  Patterns of energy use can change rapidly, he said, as demonstrated by energy efficiencies prompted by the Arab oil embargo of the 1970's. The task in Kyoto, he said, is to take action sufficient to insure that the ''450 option'' is not foreclosed, a task he described as ''difficult.'' All emissions reduction proposals now on the table for industrialized countries would preserve that option for a time, he said, provided that third-world countries also begin reductions soon after rich nations start. Less ambitious proposals for rich nations now under discussion, like those of the United States and Japan, would provide less leeway for the poorer countries, he said. Scientists agree that the lower the concentration level desired, the sooner substantial reductions in emissions must take place. An earlier start means a softer economic landing in the long term as well, in the view of Dr. Oppenheimer and others. But this does not necessarily mean that deep cuts are necessary in the next decade or so, in the view of a number of experts. There are a number of pathways to a given concentration goal, they say, all of which  have different economic effects. One influential study, for instance, found that modest reductions in the near term followed by sharper ones later on would be less costly to the economy than sharp reductions now. Delaying sharper reductions for a time would make little difference to the climate, according to the 1996 study by Dr. Tom Wigley of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, Dr. Richard Richels of the Electric Power Research Institute and Dr. J. A. Edmonds of the Pacific Northwest Laboratory. But it would make a substantial difference to the economy, they concluded, since replacing existing power plants and other capital stock prematurely would be expensive. That, the authors said, did not mean nothing should be done, not least because it is essential to take early action to stimulate more energy-efficient capital stocks, including installations that do not use fossil fuels, when new investments are made. Environmentalists argue that aggressive action is necessary in Kyoto to signal industry that such investments are required.''We can't turn the world's economy on its nose in 15 years,'' said Dr. Wigley, ''but over 30 years, I think we can. We should be doing things now to reduce emissions after 2030.''But he said ''unavoidable change'' in the climate system is in store no matter what action is taken.

TOM'S RESTAURANT at 112th Street and Broadway in Upper  Manhattan is right out of ''Seinfeld.'' But six floors above, Dr. Makiko Sato and Dr. James E. Hansen are conjuring up a bigger world from the innards of what looks like a slightly oversized personal computer. This is no ordinary computer, however. It contains the earth's atmosphere and oceans, albeit in mathematical form, interconnected to create a virtual global climate system. About 20 of these ocean-atmosphere climate models now exist, four times as many as a decade ago. They are the principal tools available to researchers who are trying to understand how the global climate is changing. By pumping data on temperature, winds, solar radiation, ocean currents and a host of other climatic factors into a model and then setting it in motion, scientists can simulate what could happen over time if emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases increase. These simulations are the basis of predictions that the average surface temperature of the earth will rise substantially and disrupt the world's climate in coming decades unless there are reductions in the emissions of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, which is produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil. The models' forecast -- a unanimous one -- has been accepted uncritically as gospel by some environmentalists and even some scientists and dismissed as all but worthless by some opponents of emissions reductions. Most experts take a middle stance, saying that while the models are getting more realistic all the time, they remain relatively crude versions of reality whose findings should be interpreted with care. So how useful are the models as policy guides for the nations of the world as they prepare to meet in Kyoto, Japan, on Dec. 1 to negotiate cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases? One hint materializes from the computer above Tom's, one of several like it in the offices of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Dr. Sato, a physicist and climate researcher, punches keys, and world maps appear on her computer's monitor. In vivid colors ranging from yellow to orange to dark red (for degrees of warmth) through shades of blue (for degrees of cold), maps on the right of the screen show the pattern of global temperature changes the computer climate model ''predicted'' for the period 1979 to 1995. Maps on the left show the changes that actually took place. The picture presented by the comparison is clear: In broadest terms, the computer got it right; the world as a whole warmed, and the Northern Hemisphere warmed most. But it also got a lot of the regional details wrong. The computer said that eastern Canada should have warmed substantially, for instance, but, instead, it cooled a lot. Not a lot of stock should be placed in a single ''run'' of a single model, or even in many runs. But many runs of many models present the same picture suggested by the maps on Dr. Sato's screen: that the models show a general global fidelity to reality but also pervasive regional error. They also continue to yield the same general conclusion their much cruder predecessors first yielded nearly two decades ago: that a doubling of carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere would raise the earth's average surface temperature by three to eight degrees Fahrenheit.  The wide range is a measure of the differences among model projections, and thus of the uncertainty inherent in climate modeling. A doubling of carbon dioxide concentrations is expected late in the next century if the world pursues business as usual. To get an idea of the magnitude of the models' forecast, one should consider that the world is five to nine degrees warmer now than in the depths of the last ice age. Despite the models' inability to simulate the regional details of climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a group of scientists advising the climate negotiations under United Nations auspices, says its confidence in the models is growing. Not only have the models become more sophisticated and detailed, the scientists say, they have also successfully passed some important reality checks by simulating actual climate changes with reasonable accuracy. The models are exhibiting ''a progressive convergence toward what has happened in nature,'' said Dr. W. Lawrence Gates, a climatologist at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California who has long been a leader of systematic international efforts, including those of the intergovernmental panel, to evaluate the models. For making long-term predictions of climatic change on a continental scale or greater, Dr. Gates said, ''the ensemble of existing modern models is reliable'' and ''provides a firm scientific base for policy.''Not everyone agrees. Some skeptics, like Dr. Richard S. Lindzen of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, have always considered the models worthless as prognosticators, and still do. ''I'm not saying the model output bears no resemblance at all to nature; in the gross figures, it looks plausibly similar,'' Dr. Lindzen said. But that, he said, ''does not give you forecast ability.''No model, by definition, will ever match the real world perfectly. ''It's never going to happen,'' said Dr. Hansen, the director of the Goddard Institute. A decade ago, Dr. Hansen became the first scientist to go on record before Congress and say that the greenhouse effect was probably the cause of global warming. Models will always fail to mimic nature exactly, he says, even though today's smaller but much faster computers make possible a precision unapproached by the lumbering mainframe that occupied an entire floor above Tom's some 20 years ago, when the Hansen team became one of the first to simulate global climate -- and even though still faster computers are just over the horizon. For one thing, the atmosphere's normal internal churnings are to some extent unpredictable; some variations are never repeated exactly. As Dr. Hansen put it, ''the climate in any year is like a snowflake; no two are alike.'' The same can be said for decades and centuries. For another thing, the atmosphere is far too complex to be completely captured in any computer program. The essence of modeling is to simplify but to retain the processes most important in driving the climate. Nevertheless, proponents of the models say, they are the most powerful tools available for analyzing climate. While the incessant pouring of greenhouse gases into the air by industrial activity constitutes an experiment of sorts, there is no way to know how it will turn out without waiting for several decades. Why turn to computers? The atmosphere is simply too complex for any other mode of analysis, and the virtual climate made possible by computers is far closer to reality than any model that might be generated in anyone's head, the model proponents say. Some things about climate are simple and certain enough, needing no computer analysis. Scientists know, for instance, that a doubling of carbon dioxide, by itself, would warm the earth's surface by about two degrees. They also know that atmospheric concentrations of the gas are increasing as a result of industrial activity. But simplicity ends there. The warming touches off feedback processes, some of which increase the warming and some of which decrease it. For instance, a warmer atmosphere melts snow and sea ice, both of which cool the planet by reflecting sunlight; less ice and snow  means further warming. On the other hand, warming also increases low-level clouds, which cool the planet. Modeling is in large measure an exercise in representing enough of these competing influences faithfully enough to estimate their net effect.  The most important of the feedback influences, perhaps, involves water vapor, the most powerful greenhouse gas of all. An atmosphere warmed by carbon dioxide produces more vapor, and this amplification is critical to the models' forecasts of future warming. A climate model is a computer program containing mathematical equations that express fundamental laws of atmospheric physics. These laws govern the interlinked workings of the sun, atmosphere, oceans, land and other elements of the climate system. The various feedback influences are also expressed mathematically. The computer calculates the extent to which the basic physical laws dictate changes in things like temperature and precipitation over time and under different conditions.  For instance, modelers can introduce any sort of ''forcing'' influence they want -- increasing greenhouse gases, for instance -- to see what would happen over decades and centuries. One big limitation of the models in predicting the climate decades ahead is that despite the growing speed of computers, they are unable to calculate climatic changes everywhere in the atmosphere. Instead, they make the calculations only at widely separated points. The points form a three-dimensional grid typically rising 10 or 12 miles above the earth. A typical spacing between grid points is about 150 miles horizontally and less than half a mile vertically. This ''resolution,'' as scientists call it, is about twice as fine as a decade ago. But it still misses many processes that happen between grid points -- cloud formation, for example. So modelers approximate these factors as best they can. Coarse resolution is also the major reason why the models are not very good at simulating climate at the regional scale. They simply miss too many small-scale climatic influences, like topography, vegetation and regional atmospheric churnings.  Some modelers have developed techniques for overcoming this. For instance, they might model only part of the ocean-atmosphere system, using much more closely spaced grid points, to get a better fix on regional changes. That approach has been successfully employed, for instance, in predicting the comings and goings of El Nino, the vast pool of tropical Pacific water that disrupts weather around the world. In another technique, modelers take the general results of a global climate model and use them to construct a second model of higher resolution for a limited region. Researchers at Pennsylvania State University have so far successfully used this ''nesting'' technique to reproduce observed precipitation patterns in the Middle Atlantic region. As computers become more advanced, the resolution of models continues to improve. Researchers at a number of Federal laboratories are collaborating in the development of a next-generation model using several computers operating in parallel. The ocean part of the model has a horizontal grid spacing of less than 20 miles, which researchers believe is necessary to represent fine-scale ocean eddies and currents. It is only in the last few years that models have included deep-ocean processes, which are critical to the climate system's functioning. The ocean, for instance, absorbs both carbon dioxide and heat, transports heat from one part of the planet to the other and provides moisture to the atmosphere. An even bigger limitation of the models than coarse resolution is the incomplete knowledge of the atmosphere's functioning, Dr. Hansen says. Dr. Gates agrees, saying, ''How the natural world works -- that's always going to be our problem.''Still, the models have been steadily incorporating more and more features of the climate system. One of the most important, in terms of model realism, has been the effect of tiny solid particles and liquid droplets suspended in the atmosphere. The modern economy produces a lot of these aerosols, as they are called, most notably sulfur dioxide droplets emitted by industry. Aerosols cool parts of the planet by reflecting sunlight. Before this effect was included in the models, they consistently produced more global warming than was being observed. Afterward, the model representations and the observations agreed more closely. With the aerosol effect factored in, the intergovernmental science panel estimates that the average global temperature will rise by two to six degrees in the next century, with a best estimate of about three and a half degrees, barring cuts in greenhouse emissions. The warming will continue after that, the panel says. The biggest gap in knowledge, many scientists believe, is that the net effect of clouds on the planet's temperature is still unknown. While low-level clouds reflect heat, high-level clouds trap it. Moreover, experts do not fully understand how water vapor behaves when the atmosphere warms. The amount by which vapor amplifies the warming therefore remains uncertain. Dr. Lindzen has long maintained that the models simply get the physics of the water vapor feedback wrong, at least at high altitudes. The United Nations panel says the amplification clearly takes place at lower altitudes but concedes the uncertainty about higher altitudes. Even if such uncertainties are somehow resolved, modelers will  never be sure that they have included all the information necessary for realism. ''With any models, what you never know is what you haven't put in,'' said Dr. Jeremiah P. Ostriker of Princeton University, who comes at computer modeling from a different perspective, that of an astrophysicist who uses models to study the cosmos. The best reality check, he said, ''is to see how well you can match the real world.''By that standard, on the plus side, mainstream scientists say the models reproduce the main features of present-day climate, including the seasonal cycle, the comings and goings of monsoons, the seasonal shift of major rain belts and storm tracks, the average daily temperature cycle and many large-scale features of ocean circulation. In the last two years, Dr. Gates said, models have for the first time reproduced the magnitude and frequency of the climate system's natural internal fluctuations on several time scales. ''A number of them now have simulated variability that looks realistic,'' he said. But, he said, the unpredictability inherent in these fluctuations makes it impossible to predict their timing, and always will. The models have also reproduced, at least in general outline, the changes in global climate observed in the last century. These include not only a general global warming of about one degree but also broad patterns of temperature change, both geographically and vertically,  through the atmosphere. When the Mount Pinatubo volcano erupted in the Philippines in 1991, sending aloft a global haze of planet-cooling aerosols, the Goddard model predicted that the cooling would be about one degree at its low point and would last about two years. That is what actually happened. To many experts, that indicates that the model faithfully reflects the climate system's sensitivity to heating and cooling influences from outside -- whether they be aerosols or greenhouse gases. Models have also simulated the climate of the last ice age and come up with an average global temperature about seven degrees lower than today's, well within the cold period's actual temperature range. But the models do not always match reality this well. One major shortcoming, for instance, is that the global models fail to simulate accurately the major temperature swings associated with El Nino. And there is that biggest deficiency of all:  the failure to predict climatic change accurately on a regional scale. In sum, the models are still cloudy crystal balls. But they are getting clearer, and they offer some answers.''Despite all the uncertainties, I think you can make useful estimates'' of climatic change using the models, said Dr. Andrew P. Ingersoll, a planetary scientist at the California Institute of Technology who employs them to investigate the climates of other planets.''You just have to be aware of the uncertainties,'' he said. ''It's just like any other scientific process.''Warming WorldThis article is one of a series that have appeared since Aug. 12 on the science, politics and economics of climate change with the approach of an international meeting in Kyoto, Japan, beginning Dec. 1 to discuss limits on greenhouse gases.

THOMAS R. CASTEN has been rising before the sun, the ideas flowing even before his head leaves the pillow. Position papers, a book, all are taking shape under headings like ''The Environmental Benefits of Electric Company Restructuring'' and ''Combining Production of Heat and Power.''For 20 years, the 6-foot-1 Mr. Casten, a former Marine who served in Vietnam, said he has been waiting for someone of national importance to heed his message: power plants can become doubly efficient and in the process dramatically reduce their emission of greenhouse gases by capturing waste heat and turning it into steam for heating office buildings and houses. One of the most effective and economical ways to help the environment, he said, is for electric companies to compete with one another on the open market instead of being hampered by outmoded regulations. Now, at last, someone is paying attention to what Mr. Casten has to say. That someone is the President of the United States. Mr. Casten, president of Trigen Energy Corporation here, was one of the industry leaders who gathered for a daylong White House conference on climate change held recently at Georgetown University in Washington. President Clinton engaged in intense discussion with a panel of experts, including Mr. Casten, in preparation for a 150-country meeting on global warming to be held next month in Kyoto, Japan. Negotiations for an international treaty to limit emissions of carbon dioxide are expected to culminate at the meeting, which is viewed as a first step in reducing the rate of increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Mr. Casten has shown his energy and determination in groups as diverse as the Boy Scouts, which, for his lifetime of service, named him the Distinguished Eagle Scout in Westchester and Putnam Counties this year, and the Westchester Philharmonic, which he helped start in 1983. Scientists have painted a dire picture of what will happen on earth if heat-trapping carbon dioxide emissions, produced by the burning of fossil fuels, are not curtailed.''My message today is simple,'' the 55-year-old Mr. Casten told Mr. Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and other members of the audience. ''You can unleash market forces that will lower greenhouse gas emissions and reduce energy costs by opening electric markets to retail competition. America's entrepreneurs will eliminate energy waste, if given a chance to compete.'' Then he added: ''When you go to Kyoto, play to our strengths. Tell the other nations that we will unleash our entrepreneurial strength to improve power plants worldwide.''A few weeks later, at the National Geographic Society in Washington, when he heard President Clinton's address on global warming, Mr. Casten said he was gratified to hear the following: ''Here at home, we must move forward by unleashing the full power of free markets and technological innovations to meet the challenge of climate change.'' The President later presented a plan to reach the 1990 greenhouse emissions level by 2008 to 2012 with a $5 billion program of tax cuts and research and development for new technologies, incentives for companies that cut emissions early and an international-market-based emissions trading system. Never mind that the President did not quite endorse deregulation and critics contend that the Government is moving too slowly to curtail greenhouse gases, Mr. Casten said. The ball, though still on the one-yard line at the wrong end of the field, he said, is at least in motion. Trigen, a company founded by Mr. Casten and several partners in 1980, aims to cut fuel use and pollution in half by using the heat normally wasted in generating a product like electricity. The company, which is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, operates with a system called combined heat and power to produce electricity, steam and chilled water for cooling from one source. Trigen -- the term trigeneration, which the company coined, refers to the generation of the three products -- serves customers like the Coors brewery in Golden, Colo., the John Hancock Building in Boston, the Nassau Community College and public buildings in Nassau County and government offices and other buildings in Philadelphia, Baltimore and St. Louis, among other cities. The company, which had total revenues of $250 million last year, claims 70 percent efficiency for its fuel compared with 30 percent efficiency for most of the larger power plants in the country. What bothers Mr. Casten is that utility companies are not permitted to use the strategies and maneuvers that enable other businesses to grow and be innovative. Under current laws, utility companies lack the incentive for improvement, he said. Mr. Casten said he believes that market forces are the answer to the global catastrophe -- at least where the United States is concerned. He approached addressing the President like an actor who has been studying his role for a long time: he was raring to go. ''I wasn't nervous,'' Mr. Casten said in a recent interview in his office. ''I've never been so prepared for anything in my life.''Before the Georgetown conference took place, President Clinton referred to Trigen and to Mr. Casten by name in discussing efficient energy production with a group of weather forecasters. After the conference, his picture appeared in The Washington Post with Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore, and magazine editorials repeated phrases nearly verbatim from his speech. To those who know the Colorado native, his effective use of the limelight came as no surprise. He was the founding chairman of the Westchester Philharmonic, and many credit the orchestra's continued success to his firm guidance in its early years. But because recycled energy is not a widely familiar concept, Mr. Casten was not able to use his gifts for communication and persuasion in his own arena until recently, when the coming Kyoto conference forced a thorough study of the global warming issue. Now that he has the President's ear, Mr. Casten said, he is keeping a steady flow of information headed toward Washington about the benefits of deregulation. Opponents include members of the utilities industry as well as some environmentalists, who fear increased pollution if coal plants in the Middle West are allowed to make power for the Northeast.''Markets don't work that way,'' Mr. Casten said. ''Typically, an environmentalist is not somebody that really understands markets.''He referred to the dissension within the Administration about suggestions like taxing carbon -- a strategy Mr. Casten vehemently opposes -- and compared deregulating electricity with opening trade with China: it took a Republican, Richard M. Nixon, to do the latter, and it may take a Democrat, operating within a traditional Republican domain, to do the former. ''This is not a popular political issue,'' Mr. Casten said. ''This is Clinton thinking about his legacy. It is his fate to have been the President of the most powerful nation in the world when we found out, almost for the first time, that human activities had reached a scale where we were affecting the globe.''

AS scientists seek to improve their imperfect understanding of how and why the world's climate is changing, evidence continues to mount that most  of the last 10,000 years -- long thought to be a benign era whose stability was crucial to the rise of civilization -- has in fact been typified by episodes of warmth, cold, drought and flooding more extreme than anything experienced in the 20th century. About a thousand years ago, for instance, Europe basked in warmth that nurtured vineyards in Britain and allowed the Norse to colonize Greenland. At roughly the same time, what is now California was baking in centuries-long droughts,  dwarfing the mere seven-year droughts of today. Early South American civilizations literally dried up and blew away. But only a few centuries later, in what is called the Little Ice Age, severe cold gripped much of the world, sending glaciers coursing down mountainsides, freezing European harvests and starving much of the populace. Natural variations like these raise important questions in the scientific debate that underlies efforts by the nations of the world, at a conference beginning Dec. 1 in Kyoto, Japan, to cope with the prospect of climate change. How much of the global warming observed in the last century is natural, and how much has been caused by waste industrial gases that trap heat in the atmosphere?  And how might natural climatic fluctuations modify and interact with whatever climate changes caused by people are in store for the future? Now an important new element has been added to the emerging picture of pervasive, natural climatic change in the Holocene, the period since the vestiges of the last ice age vanished 10,000 years ago. Centuries-long cold spells much like that of the Little Ice Age have occurred more or less regularly, roughly every 1,400 to 1,500 years, report researchers, led by Dr. Gerard Bond at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University, in the current issue of the journal Science. They discovered the oscillations by analyzing climatic signals in ancient ocean sediments in the North Atlantic. The quasi-periodic swings were found to persist over the last 32,000 years, which is as far back as it was possible to date the sediments by the radiocarbon method. This means that the 1,500-year cycle also operated in the last ice age. But during that period, the cyclical cold spells were much more severe than in the Holocene. In the ice age spells, Dr. Bond said, the surface temperature of the North Atlantic where the sediment samples were taken dropped by about 9 to 14 degrees Fahrenheit. In the Holocene spells, the drop was about 2 to 3.5 degrees. How that translated into changes in the air temperature is unclear.  Scientists believe, on the basis of other evidence, that air temperature dropped by 1 to 3 degrees in the Little Ice Age. In the late 19th and 20th centuries, the global temperature has bounced back from the Little Ice Age cold, rising by about 1 degree and suggesting that the world may now be in the early stages of a centuries-long cycle of natural warmth. ''We could be coming out of the colder phase into the warmer phase of the cycle right now,'' Dr. Bond said. On the other hand, he said, the warming of the 20th century could be a relatively temporary warming blip, and the cold of the Little Ice Age might resume. He and his colleagues discovered many such temporary interruptions of previous cold phases. The dominant view among climate scientists is that the warming of the 20th century has been caused at least in part by emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, which are produced by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas. The prevailing view also says that further warming is in store as a result of the emissions and that such warming could seriously disrupt the earth's climate system in the next century. Representatives from some 150 countries are to convene in Kyoto to negotiate cuts in emissions. But no one knows how much of the observed warming is attributable to the heat-trapping gases and how much is caused by natural fluctuations in climate. In an attempt to sort things out, scientists have been focusing more on past climates, searching for patterns that might shed light on the present and future. While the impact of natural variations on present-day climate cannot yet be pinned down with precision, Dr. Bond said, ''it's probably fair to say that we're seeing a component of natural variability'' in the last century's warming. Other recent studies have suggested that the world is in the early stages of a natural warming phase and that, if so, any warming caused by greenhouse gas emissions would come on top of the natural temperature increase, delivering something of a one-two punch. That has been suggested most recently by other new research reported in the current issue of Science.  Investigators headed by Dr. Jonathan Overpeck of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Geophysical Data Center in Boulder, Colo., examined climatic indicators in lake and ocean sediments, tree rings and glacier ice in the Arctic. They found that from 1840 to the mid-20th century, Arctic temperatures warmed to their highest levels in 400 years, ending the Little Ice Age in those latitudes. The researchers attributed the early part of this bounce-back warming to natural causes but said that greenhouse gas emissions had probably contributed after about 1920. All the recent findings say only so much about where the present-day climate fits into the long-term pattern of natural variations. The 1,500-year oscillations discovered by Dr. Bond and his colleagues, said Dr. Delia Oppo, a paleooceanographer at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute at Woods Hole, Mass., ''are not perfectly periodic so we don't really know where we are in detail -- it's not that cut and dried.'' But ''if we can nail the timing more clearly,'' she said, ''it really helps us when we're looking at global warming.''  Dr. Oppo wrote a commentary on the Bond team's study in Science. The Overpeck team, writing in Science and referring to its study of the Arctic, cautioned against efforts ''to simply extrapolate past patterns of change into the future.'' That will ''ultimately fail to anticipate future Arctic climate change and its impacts,'' the scientists wrote. Reliable predictions, they said, will require computerized climate-system models that simulate the long-ago changes now being reconstructed. While precision eludes scientists who are researching ancient climates, a raft of studies in recent years has made it clear that the conventional view of the Holocene as an even, tranquil interval in climatic history is in error. Compared with big climatic swings of the past, like the ice ages and the super-warming of the Cretaceous period, which melted almost all the world's ice before ending some 65 million years ago, the Holocene variations are small. But compared with the experience of everyone alive today, they seem large indeed. The catalogue of Holocene climatic variability is large and growing.  Several times in the Holocene, for instance, great stretches of the American West have been converted by drought into expanses of windblown sand like the Sahara. Starting about 3,300 years ago, the upper Mississippi Valley experienced a series of what would today be called 500-year floods. Archeological and climatological evidence suggest that a number of pre-Inca cultures rose and fell in tune with big droughts. Starting about 1,100 years ago, California experienced droughts lasting 220 years and 140 years, both more intense than present-day droughts lasting less than a decade. The 20th century, scientists say, has actually been part of a California wet period. The droughts a millennium ago coincided with a similar drought that caused the collapse of South America's most advanced pre-Inca empire, a nation-state called Tiwanaku. That was roughly the same period when the Norse colonized Greenland and Britons tended vineyards. Drought has also been implicated in the collapse of the classic Maya civilization in Yucatan, and a 300-year drought is believed to have brought the Middle East's earliest known empire, that of the Akkadians, to its knees some 4,200 years ago. And now, thanks to the Lamont-Doherty team's study, there is the evidence of semiperiodic cold spells of millennial length. The team analyzed corings taken from ocean sediments off Ireland and southeastern Greenland. The corings contained two kinds of evidence. One was grains of sand deposited on the sea floor when cold water north of Iceland periodically moved southward. The water carried ice, and sand was released from the ice when it melted in the more southerly latitudes. More sand at a particular time, the scientists reasoned, signified more sea ice and thus a movement of cold water southward.  That, they inferred, cooled the climate. The second kind of evidence involved tiny animals called foraminifera that live in oceanic surface waters. Their calcified shells also fall to the sea floor when they die. Certain kinds of these animals thrive in colder waters, some in warmer ones. The researchers found cold-water foraminifera in the same seabed strata as bigger concentrations of sand grains. Together, this evidence indicated the existence of the 1,500-year cycle (1,470 years with a margin of error of plus or minus 500 years) of alternating cold and warm spells. The cycle is independent of, and superimposed on, the longer cycle in which ice ages come and go every 100,000 years or so, the researchers concluded. The team's coring record stopped just short of the Little Ice Age, but Dr. Bond said that event appeared to have been the latest in the series of 1,500-year cold cycles. Other studies of ocean sediments have previously demonstrated that the Little Ice Age reached its coldest point about 300 years ago, that an even colder cycle occurred about 8,200 years ago and that there were instances of pronounced rises in temperature, to somewhat higher levels than today's, 1,000 and 2,500 years ago. The cause of the 1,500-year oscillations is unclear. It could have to do with changes in the sun's output, some scientists say, but the Bond team favors some sort of mechanism within the climate system involving interactions between the atmosphere and ocean currents. Deep ocean currents transport heat around the globe and are particularly important in delivering it to the North Atlantic region. Many scientists believe that interruptions or weakenings of the currents are involved in large-scale climatic changes. In the current issue of the journal Nature, a study headed by Dr. Jess F. Adkins of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology links the beginning and end of the last interglacial period around 120,000 years ago to abrupt changes in these deep currents. That interglacial period was similar to the Holocene in that it marked a warm interval between ice ages. Because of the apparently major role of the ocean currents, many scientists express nervousness about the possible effects of greenhouse warming on the currents. For example, computerized climate models indicate that global warming would cause more water to evaporate from tropical oceans and be carried northward, where it would condense and fall as rain or snow, said Dr. Scott Lehman, a paleoclimatologist at the University of Colorado in Boulder who wrote a commentary on the Adkins study in Nature. The extra influx of fresh water, he said, could dilute the salt content of the heat-transporting current, and the density conferred by salinity affects the capacity to carry heat. Less salinity ''tends to weaken the conveyor'' of heat, he said. That could cool the North Atlantic region substantially, but the overall warming exerted by greenhouse gases would probably keep the rest of the world warmer. In any event, he said, ''the stability of interglacial climate is delicately poised with respect to the ocean circulation.'' To the extent that climate is governed by natural oscillations, Dr. Lehman said, ''we may excite that process by fossil fuel burning.''Warming WorldThis article is one of a series that has appeared since Aug. 12 on the science, politics and economics of climate change with the approach of an international meeting in Kyoto, Japan, beginning Dec. 1 to discuss limits on greenhouse gases.

Ted Turner, who has promised to give $1 billion to the United Nations over the next decade, today named the man who will allocate the money, the largest donation ever made to the organization. He is Timothy E. Wirth, a former Senator from Colorado who is now the Undersecretary of State for Global Affairs. Mr. Wirth, who is involved in environmental and population issues, is to leave the State Department at the end of December to become president of what will be called the United Nations Foundation. United Nations officials are meeting today and Thursday with representatives of Mr. Turner to discuss areas in which the new foundation will work. The impending departure of Mr. Wirth from the Administration clouds an international conference on Dec. 1 in Kyoto, Japan, on a treaty to fight global warming. As the top State Department official dealing with environmental issues, he was the lead negotiator in those talks. People in environmental organizations who have worked with Mr. Wirth said today that he appeared to be unhappy with the Administration's policy, which did not meet the hopes of Europeans and others that the United States would move faster to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.''He is passionate on these issues, said Jonathan Lash, executive director of the World Resources Institute in Washington. ''He was often Horatius at the bridge.''In an interview, Mr. Wirth, 57, brushed aside differences with the Administration and said he accepted Mr. Turner's offer because he could not resist ''an incredible opportunity'' to help shape a new generation of foundations and concentrate on global issues in an international setting. He said he would be part fund-raiser, increasing the seed money of Mr. Turner's grant of stock and cash; part networker, drawing on the growing number and strength of private organizations around the world, and part public advocate for the United Nations as it focuses increasingly on 21st century themes.''People care a great deal about these new issues, the new global issues, post-cold-war issues,'' he said, mentioning immigration and population growth, the environment, terrorism, narcotics, international crime and the world economy.''These are the new issues,'' he said. ''We have these new issues and in a way you have old bottles. You have systems set up at the State Department and elsewhere that were designed for a cold-war era.''Joseph E. Connor, Under Secretary General of the United Nations for Administration and Management, said today that the United Nations had presented the Turner group with 10 areas in which the new foundation could concentrate its efforts, from poverty to education and help for refugees. The United Nations has named Angela Kane, a German who has been in charge of the organization's library and electronic informations, as its representative at the trust fund. Directors of United Nations programs will have to compete for the Turner money, which will be spent at the rate of about $25 million a quarter. Grants are expected to begin in early 1998. Mr. Wirth said today that he considered Mr. Turner ''a man of enormous vision and genius'' with whom he has shared a number of important interests over the years. While in the Senate, Mr. Wirth supported -- among other things -- the loosening of broadcasting monopolies held by large commercial networks, which was a boon to Mr. Turner's Cable News Network. Both men also share an interest in bringing economic forces into solving environmental problems, Mr. Wirth said. ''I have known Ted Turner for 20 years,'' he said, ''and have always admired the way in which he fought in a very mold-breaking fashion.''Mr. Turner said in a statement today: ''Tim Wirth shares my vision for the future, in which the public and private sectors work side by side to improve global quality of life and rebuild the spirit of and support for the United Nations.''Mr. Wirth, who was born in New Mexico, grew up in Colorado and graduated from Harvard and Stanford, where he received a Ph. D. in education, said Americans are much more interested in global issues and world affairs than politicians think.

In the gray world of the European Union's bureaucracy in Brussels, Ritt Bjerregaard, an unwavering politician from Denmark, stands out as a splash of color. While other officials deliver criticism in whispers and avoid confrontation, Ms. Bjerregaard speaks her mind. As Commissioner for the Environment, her job is to prod the 15 countries of the union to enforce their common rules and to cut pollution of air, land and water. Her manner is always polished and she delivers opinions in a cool style. But Ms. Bjerregaard, 56, has aimed her barbs where others have not dared. While her colleagues on the European Union's executive body chose diplomatic silence, she took on France's President, Jacques Chirac, for conducting nuclear test explosions in 1995. Europe's farmers, who are helped with generous subsidies, are polluters, she has said, because they use too many chemicals. This year, in an unusual step, she slapped three pollution fines on Germany, stinging a Government that likes to boast of its environmental concerns. Now Ms. Bjerregaard has taken on her biggest challenge so far, turning to the United States and Japan. As Europe's chief negotiator at the climate talks to be held in Kyoto, Japan, in early December, she has complained about ''weak'' anti-pollution proposals coming from Washington and Tokyo. The Kyoto conference aims to set binding limits on heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide that may contribute to global warming. Although wrapped in technical jargon, the talks involve these basic questions: Who has the right to pollute and by how much? Ms. Bjerregaard has called the negotiations ''hot-air trading.''The European Union has proposed cuts of so-called greenhouse gases that are far more stringent than those of the rest of the industrialized world, and Ms. Bjerregaard has been pressing Washington to change its stance. But European business leaders are not happy to see Europe go to Kyoto pledging high cutbacks of greenhouse gases. They argue they are already at a disadvantage in relation to the United States, where energy and fuel are far less expensive. The United States has said it will stabilize its emissions at 1990 levels by 2012. The European Union wants to cut emissions 15 percent below its 1990 level by 2010. Japan calls for a 2.5 to 5 percent cut by 2010. On her return from a recent trip to Washington, Ms. Bjerregaard said President Clinton's proposals were deeply disappointing, all the more so because the United States emits more greenhouse gases per capita than any other country.''The U.S. is going back on the commitments made in Rio,'' she told executives and lobbyists of energy industries in Brussels, referring to the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. ''The European Union once again will have to take the lead. It is clear that we cannot depend on leadership by the U.S. and Japan.''Such outspokenness has sometimes startled officials at the Brussels European Union headquarters. Her most serious problem, though, is the lack of enforcement of the union's environmental rules. Some countries, she said, have not even bothered to incorporate the common rules into their national legislation. But she is the first environment commissioner to use the power of her office to impose fines for violations. ''The effect has been remarkable,'' she said. ''Already half the cases on my list are solved just because of this threat.''

Saying that criticisms by other countries of the United States' position on global warming are ''ill-founded,'' the Clinton Administration's new chief negotiator on a climate treaty acknowledged today that it might not be possible to bridge the remaining differences with Europe and the developing world.''We are not going in with the notion that we have to have an agreement at any cost,'' Under Secretary of State Stuart E. Eizenstat said in a telephone conversation with journalists as he prepared to lead the American delegation to talks that will begin next week in Japan.''We will go to Kyoto and make an all-out effort,'' Mr. Eizenstat said. But he added that he was ''neither optimistic nor pessimistic, but realistic,'' about the difficulties.''We must remember that nations remain quite far apart,'' he said, ''and achieving agreement will be a challenge.''Whether his comments were meant to lower expectations and pave the way for possible failure or a weakened treaty, or to raise the pressure and persuade other countries to make concessions, Mr. Eizenstat's remarks were more guarded than those made recently by his predecessor as chief negotiator, Tim Wirth.  Mr. Wirth had said that differences with Europe, especially, were not so great and were shrinking. In contrast, Mr. Eizenstat said that the United States had ''significant problems'' with a central feature of Europe's position: that members of the European Union be considered as a unit in achieving reductions in the emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that trap the sun's heat like a greenhouse, rather than requiring each nation to achieve reductions. He called it ''an artificial advantage, and one that no other country or set of countries has.''The United States, Mr. Eizenstat said, would insist that many developing countries agree to binding reductions in their emissions of those gases ''over a reasonable period of time,'' but he added that these commitments need not be the same as the targets for developed countries. The commitments must come from the wealthier developing countries, measured by per capita income, and from the developing countries that, because of their sheer size, emit large amounts of such greenhouse gases, Mr. Eizenstat said. Those countries would probably include, among others, the top five sources of carbon dioxide emissions in the developing world: China, India, South Korea, South Africa and Mexico, which among them in 1996 gave off almost as much greenhouse gases as the United States. Their emissions have been growing much faster than American emissions, although emissions per person in the United States are much greater.''We are talking about focusing on key developing countries,'' Mr. Eizenstat said. ''They have to make a meaningful contribution.''Mr. Eizenstat said a provision in the current draft of the proposed treaty, allowing developing countries to sign up voluntarily for binding emissions targets, was a positive step toward what the Administration is seeking. But he said that a treaty, to be acceptable, also had to provide for international trading of emission control credits, which would let countries like the United States pay for reductions to be made in other countries instead of making domestic cuts at greater expense.

This little village is hauntingly beautiful, a patchwork of mud-brick shacks framed by the vastness of the Yellow River on one side and rugged gray mountains on the other. But as peasants shuffle along the ocher paths, their eyes following their children and aching at the sight, the hamlet suddenly seems chilly, frightening and grotesque. One-third of the peasants in this hamlet in Gansu Province in western China are mentally retarded or seriously ill. Most people die in middle age, the women report unending miscarriages and stillbirths, many of the children are trapped in toddler-size bodies that they never grow out of, and even the goats totter and stagger into trees as they go blind and insane. In the entrance to one house stood a boy named Wei Haiyun, only 29 inches tall -- the height that an average American baby boy reaches at 12 months, but Haiyun is 8 years old. Haiyun, who is mentally retarded as well, casually urinated on the floor and then played with his fingers in the puddle, as his mother watched and bit her lip and admitted that the only word he ever utters is ''Ma.''The peasants believe that the horrors of Badui village are the result of polluted water discharged by the state-run Liujiaxia Fertilizer Factory next door. The factory, which sometimes denies the accusations and mostly ignores them, dumps its wastes into the Yellow River just upstream from where the villagers draw their drinking water. The pain here in Badui is emblematic of the growing environmental catastrophe all across Asia. The cost of Asia's ''economic miracle'' is a rising tide of pollution that is proving a burden not just for Asia but for the entire earth. Already, Asia has what many experts consider the dirtiest water in the world, the filthiest air, the most worrisome overfishing, and the fastest-disappearing coral reefs. One study by the United Nations suggested that 13 of the 15  cities with the worst air pollution in the world are in Asia.''The worst pollution in the world is unequivocally in Asia,'' said Daniel C. Esty, director of the Center for Environmental Law and Policy at Yale University and co-author of a new book on Asia-Pacific environmental issues. ''The statistics about China are stunning, and right behind those Chinese cities stand almost every other major city of Asia: Bangkok, Manila, Jakarta are all right up there among the top polluted cities of the world.''When delegates from the United States and more than 150 other countries gather in Kyoto, Japan, beginning on Dec. 1 for a conference on global warming, one of the fundamental underlying challenges will be how to accommodate the economic rise of Asia. Aside from the United States, China is already the biggest source of the greenhouse gases linked to global warming, and -- perhaps more worrying for the long run -- the two fastest-growing sources of these emissions are China and India. More than 1.56 million Asians die each year from the effects of air pollution alone, not counting 500,000 more who die each year from dirty water and bad sanitation, according to estimates published recently by the World Health Organization and the World Bank. Another new study, also from the World Bank but using different assumptions, calculates that 2.03 million people die annually in China alone from the effects of water and air pollution. All these figures represent statistical stabs in the dark, so all the numbers in this article may well be incorrect. But whatever the precise figures, it appears that considerably more people die each year from pollution in Asia than died in the Indochina wars centered on Vietnam (about 1.4 million, from the 1950's through the 1970's). Industrialization vastly magnifies the impact that humans have on nature, and so for the last two centuries it has been the transformation of America and Europe that has had the most dramatic consequences for the planet Earth. But many experts believe that in the coming decades, it is the industrialization of Asia that will pose fundamental new stresses for the ecosystem. Not only does Asia have 60 percent of the world's population, 12 times as much as North America's, but Asia's industrialization is also taking place at triple the pace of the industrial revolution in the West.''Asia's potential effects on global warming are certainly going to be much larger than in the past, and its potential effects on other aspects of the environment, and particularly its own environment, are likely to be greater as well,'' said Jeffrey Sachs, director of the Harvard Institute for International Development and co-author of a major study on Asia's development. ''And what that really means is that Asia has got to be a lot smarter than it has been in environmental management.''The Air  Two Bangkok Girls Gasp for BreathThe paradox is that Asians are not fleeing the filth but embracing it. From India to China, Asians vote with their feet -- moving from rural areas with relatively clean air to the squalid mega-cities that are among the filthiest places on earth. To an American, the endless Howrah slums in Calcutta, India, or the shantytowns outside Jakarta, Indonesia, seem hellish intersections of gritty air and contaminated water. But to many rural Indians or Indonesians, the slums sing of opportunity, of jobs, of schools, of hope to break out of subsistence poverty. So peasants take a calculated risk, accepting that their children may die of respiratory infections or diarrhea in exchange for the chance that they may become educated and rich. It is a dangerous gamble but not necessarily a foolish one, and for many people it pays off. Partly as a result of such risk-taking, most Asians are living longer and better than ever, and others are choking to death. The stakes are evident in the sparkling black eyes of Kittiya Soisingh, a 14-month-old girl in Bangkok. Her parents moved to a Bangkok slum to get a better life, and as a result Kittiya may lose hers altogether. Kittiya lives in a dark hovel beside an elevated highway, cars and trucks spewing out black exhaust beside her and above her, and so the air is dense with grit. She almost died recently after a respiratory infection and spent a month in a hospital, but now she is out again, lounging on a table on the cracked sidewalk outside her home, watching as the cars and trucks whiz by, waiting to be rushed to the hospital the next time.''I'm always afraid,'' fretted her mother, Vilgi Ratchamphu, 20, as she played with the girl on the street. ''I'm always afraid that she'll just stop breathing.''The problem for Kittiya is the particles in the air. In Bangkok and most Asian cities, these particles total more than the danger level of 100 micrograms per cubic meter. Among the worst cities are Taiyuan, China, and Delhi, India, each with more than 500 micrograms. Even worse is the ''indoor air pollution'' caused by cooking or heating with coal briquettes; indoor particles in China have been measured at 11,000 micrograms. These particles can trigger asthma and respiratory infections in children like Kittiya, and although such infections are rarely thought of as deadly in the West, they are the third leading cause of death in the world today, after heart disease and cancer. Moreover, cancer and heart disease tend to kill the elderly, so statisticians say acute respiratory infections cause more ''years of life lost'' than any other ailment in the world today. Particles are also associated with higher rates of lung cancer, of heart attacks and especially of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, a fancy way of describing what happens when particles clog up the lungs so that people cannot breathe. This is the leading cause of death in China and kills Chinese at five times the rate in the United States. To be sure, it is not just the particles that kill children, but also poverty. Across town from Kittiya's slum, at one of the best nursery schools in Bangkok, 13-month-old Alisa Srirat also suffers from asthma and sensitivity to respiratory infections. A vivacious little girl with chipmunk cheeks, Alisa was born in England, where her father was studying at a university, and she began gasping for breath almost immediately after moving to Thailand and encountering Bangkok's air. The girl's father, Wichai Srirat, a 33-year-old university lecturer, was able to afford good medical advice, and he ended up buying an air filter for his car to shield his daughter from air particles on the roads. That has largely resolved the crisis. Mr. Srirat smiled as he watched his daughter play on a jungle gym at the nursery school. ''She's so much better now,'' he mused.''For poorer parents like Kittiya's, stuck in the dirtiest neighborhoods and limited to third-rate medical care, if any, the deadliness of urban air in Asia creates an excruciating dilemma.''She can be treated, but she can't be cured, and the doctor says we should leave this area,'' Kittiya's mother noted sadly. ''If we stay, she'll never get over this. Her lungs won't be able to take it. But we have no place to go.''That is not exactly true, for the family could go back to the village that it left only a year ago. But a Bangkok slum, despite the bedraggled rats that amble along the gutters, still offers better schools, clinics and jobs than the countryside. So Kittiya's parents are not being irrational in risking her life. She may die, but she may also be the first in her family to break out of a cycle of subsistence poverty. It is a gamble that leaves her mother breathless with fear, but one that she still accepts. The Water  Lead and Bacteria Foul Asia's RiversOne of the greatest scientific mistakes of the 20th century was the decision to add lead to gasoline to improve performance. The lead in the air from car exhaust maims children intellectually, permanently impairing their brain development. In Chinese cities like Shanghai, the roads are clogged with new cars that are one of the most dazzling signs of China's economic triumph. But various studies have found that at least 65 percent of Shanghai children have lead levels higher than the point considered dangerous to mental development. The retardation is permanent, and half a century from now, most of these people will still be living out their lives, the flotsam of Asia's industrial revolution. Most of the lead comes from auto exhaust and hangs in the air, but because of factory discharges, Asia's rivers also average 20 times more lead than the rivers in the industrialized world. Asia's water is almost as deadly as the air, for hundreds of thousands of people die from drinking polluted water, particularly in places like India, where the rivers sometimes function simultaneously as water sources and sewage systems. The average Asian river has 50 times more bacteria from human feces than World Health Organization guidelines allow. Perhaps the worst slum in the world is in on the edge of Phnom Penh, Cambodia, on a muddy slope leading to the Bassac River. As one strolls along the wooden planks that serve as sidewalks over the stinking mud and excrement, making conversation with exhausted women trying to prepare dinner and look after their brood of naked children, nearly every mother acknowledges having lost a child or two over the years. It is easy to see why. The tens of thousands of people who live in the slum drink the river water, which is polluted with industrial effluents and also functions as the toilet for the entire community. There are countless other environmental challenges in Asia, like deforestation -- the continent is losing 1 percent of its forests each year -- and the loss of rare species of animals, particularly in countries like Indonesia that are treasures of biodiversity. But those problems seem a bit unreal to many workers and peasants; the giant panda may become extinct, but every year tens of thousands of Chinese children die from pollution for every panda that is poached. The Complexities  Unclear Causation Vs. Clear ProsperityThe study of pollution is so invested with the language of science, with everything measured in micrograms or milliliters, that it all sometimes seems tidy and precise. But in fact, one of the fundamental challenges is that at ground level in Asia, there are enormous uncertainties about how to assess the dangers, and these unknowns make regulation all the more difficult. In Badui and its surrounding villages in China, just downstream from the fertilizer factory, the precise reason for the health problems remains as murky as the factory's effluent. The only thing that is entirely clear is that something is dreadfully wrong. In the hamlet of Qidui, which is three miles from Badui and also relies mostly on river water with factory waste, there are about 13 births a year, estimates the village leader, Li Genchen. Of these, he said, eight are stillbirths or children who die in infancy, and a couple more survive but with tiny bodies. Only about three of the births lead to normal children, he said. As for adults, he said, most die in their 40's. Circumstantial evidence is clear: The problems in Qidui and Badui began around the time when the factory started operations in 1971, and they went away in a nearby village that got piped water in 1989. Factory officials acknowledged that they have dumped dangerous chemicals, including arsenic, into the water, although they say they stopped releasing arsenic in 1978.''Water pollution has been a serious problem, and local villagers have been making trouble over this issue,'' said Fu Youai, an official in the local environmental protection bureau. ''The pollution is too high and has gone way over the levels set by the state, and it's harmful to human beings.''''Every year, we order the factory to correct the problems,'' Mr. Fu added. ''But because of budget constraints, the factory hasn't been able to do so.''Tests of the water conducted on samples carried out to Japan show the presence of ammonia, nitrites and trace metals. The tests also showed arsenic in levels that exceed safety standards, but not by a large margin, and in any case these would not normally produce precisely the symptoms seen in these villages. Doctors and chemists consulted in Japan and in the United States noted that a single sample is often not reliable, because chemicals can be released irregularly. They added that the causation of health problems can be extremely complex. Something in the effluent might build up in fish, they said. Or some chemical in the effluent might act in combination with a mineral deficiency in the peasants, and they suggested that identifying the problem might take years of research. Such complexities are common, for in Japan's most famous pollution case it took years to prove that inorganic mercury used by a factory in Minamata was turning into a highly toxic substance called methyl mercury. The methyl mercury then accumulated in fish and caused birth defects in babies born to women who ate the fish. Yet for all the mystery about the ailments of Badui, there is one overwhelming practical certainty in Badui that has an echo all across Asia: The polluting factory is crucial to the regional economy. The factory employs 3,000 workers and annually produces 160,000 tons of urea fertilizer, which in turn improves the diet and raises the living standards of millions of people in Gansu Province. If the factory was forced to close, the increased local poverty would almost certainly lead to more people dying of mundane diseases and fewer children being able to afford to go to school. So officials at the factory, which is only marginally profitable, are not at all sympathetic to the peasants and dismiss them as troublemakers grasping for compensation payments.''The villagers are lazy and unreasonable,'' scoffed Zeng Qingang, a factory director. ''They say, 'We should get rich by living off the factory.' ''Moreover, even some of the villagers are wary of thorough investigations that might harm their own livelihood -- like raising fish in ponds full of the tainted water. There are several of these fish farms, and although the villagers say the pollution kills up to half the fish, they sell the surviving fish on the market in the nearby city of Lanzhou.''The fish taste different from the fish raised in cleaner water,'' acknowledged Cui Tengxiong, a local fish farmer. ''I'm a bit afraid that they'll test the fish and then tell us not to sell them.''The heartbreak here in Badui and across Asia is so numbing that one sometimes forgets that the pollution is only half of the seesaw, and that the other half -- economic development -- is even more stunning. Industrialization may be poisoning hundreds of thousands of people each year, but it is also resulting in new hospitals and schools that are saving even more lives. Even in Badui, the peasants acknowledge that for all their difficulties with death and disease, their lives have improved dramatically. As recently as the great famine of 1959-61, many starved to death in Badui. So some of the peasants, even as they sorrowfully watch their retarded children, bear the hardships that they attribute to pollution remarkably well. They suffer tragedies but keep them in a kind of perspective.''My husband's stomach is sick, so he can't do much,'' Qi Chunnu, a stooped farm wife with downcast eyes, said tiredly as she stood in the entrance to her home in Badui. ''My eldest child is mentally retarded. My second child is deaf and can't speak right.''And then she beamed: ''But my third child is O.K.''NEXT: Public obliviousness to the health risks of Asia's environmental disaster.

As the world's nations gather in Japan to discuss how best to counter the threat of global warming, the American people are far more willing than their Government to take early, unilateral steps, a New York Times Poll has found. They appear to be unimpressed by arguments that cutting the United States' emissions of heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere might cause undue economic harm, as industry groups opposing a treaty have contended. Sixty-five percent of those polled said that the United States, which releases more such greenhouse gases than any other country, should take steps now to cut its own emissions ''regardless of what other countries do.'' The poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points. Only 15 percent of the 953 people polled by telephone on Sunday and Monday said the United States should delay acting until many countries agree how to address the problem together. Better-educated people are most likely to favor early action by the United States. Fully three-quarters of college graduates favor acting even without a binding treaty, as do 59 percent of high school graduates. Men and women are equally likely to favor unilateral action. Delegates from 166 nations are assembling Monday in Kyoto to try to negotiate a tougher, binding treaty on controlling emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that trap the Sun's heat in the Earth's atmosphere and threaten to change the planet's climate. The treaty would supplant the voluntary pact that was adopted five years ago at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. The Clinton Administration's position going into the talks has been criticized by European nations who say it would delay action for too long, and many Third World nations have been resisting the Administration's insistence that developing countries join the industrial nations in pledging to cut emissions. American emissions of greenhouse gases have been increasing ever since the world's industrial nations agreed five years ago to try to reduce them by the turn of the century. The Administration has proposed a binding treaty stabilizing emissions at the 1990 levels, but not until another 10 or 15 years have passed. The poll suggests that the public rejects the main arguments against such a treaty that have been voiced by industry groups, some unions and their allies in Congress. Rather, most Americans tend to agree with the position on the talks taken by major environmental groups. Still, just 1 percent of all respondents offered the environment when asked what was the most important problem facing the country; crime topped the list. When asked what environmental problem was most important, people were more likely to name air and water pollution than global warming. Twenty-seven percent said they had heard or read a lot about global warming and 38 percent said they had heard or read ''some'' about it. About a third said they knew ''not much'' or ''nothing'' about it. Generally, Americans strongly favor environmental protection despite its costs, the poll showed. Sixty-one percent of respondents favor protecting the environment even it it costs jobs in their community; 57 percent said environmental improvements must be made regardless of costs. Majorities have taken that view for 15 years. Major industries, including companies that produce and consume large amounts of fossil fuels, have criticized the Administration for moving too quickly on global warming, saying that the science of global warming remains uncertain and that limiting energy use or raising energy prices could needlessly harm the American economy. But neither of these arguments appear to carry much weight with the public. Fifty-seven percent of those surveyed agreed that the American economy would become more competitive if the nation controlled greenhouse gas emissions ''because these efforts will result in more efficient energy use, saving money in the long run.'' Only 17 percent agreed that cutting emissions ''will cost too much money and hurt the U.S. economy.''Only 16 percent said that they believed global warming results from normal fluctuations in climate rather than from emissions released when people burn fossil fuels like coal, oil and gasoline. Asked when serious effects from global warming might be expected, an even smaller minority, 13 percent, said they believed global warming would have no serious effect. In contrast, 23 percent said they believed global warming's impact was already serious. Another 43 percent said global warming's effects would not be felt until the future. Despite that belief, 6 out of 7 people in this group said steps were needed right away to counter global warming. Younger adults, especially those less than 30 years old, were more likely than older ones to believe that the effects of global warming are already being felt. And older people, especially those older than 65, are more likely to believe it will not have a serious impact at all. Most people said they would be willing to spend money on efficient appliances, insulation and other energy-saving investments to cut emissions of greenhouse gases and save money on gas and electric bills. Only 20 percent said they would not be willing to do so. Forty-one percent of the people in the sample said they would be willing to spend money to cut energy use even if it took as much as five years of reduced gas and electric bills to cover the cost of the investment. Far and away the most popular approach to cutting emissions was for the Government to impose energy efficiency standards on manufacturers of cars, appliances and so on. Fifty percent said they would favor this approach, while 20 percent said they favored tax breaks for nonpolluting energy like solar and wind power. Only 2 percent said they favored extra taxes on gasoline or other fossil fuels. It appeared that people were not ready to endorse the Administration's proposed approach to reducing emissions of greenhouse gases, which would involve a complicated system of trading pollution permits. When this system was described and people were told that it ''would give companies a financial reason to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases,'' 49 percent said they did not know enough to judge the proposal's merits. Fifteen percent said it was a good idea, and 17 percent said it was a bad idea. How the Survey Was ConductedThe latest New York Times Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted on Sunday and Monday with 953 adults across the United States. The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen to assure that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its population. For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. The numbers were then screened so that calls would be placed to residences only. Within each household one adult was designated at random to be the respondent for the poll. The results from all regions were weighted to reflect the actual adult population of the nation. The results have also been weighted to take account of household size and number of telephone lines and to adjust for variations in race, sex, age, and education. In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ by no more than three percentage points either way from what would have been obtained from all American adults. In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

Ramli lay on the plank floor of his shack, coughing and breathless, fighting for air like a beached fish. Mr. Ramli, a 37-year-old sawmill worker, died like that in this riverside village on the Indonesian island of Sumatra, leaving no savings and no legacy other than the uncomprehending tears on the unscrubbed faces of his three little daughters -- and the mound in his widow's stomach that signifies another baby is on its way. Yet as Mr. Ramli's widow and children sat grieving inside their shack, wondering how they would survive, the girls coughing themselves, they had no idea what killed him. What about the smoke?''Oh, yeah, that might have been it,'' agreed Dariah, his 27-year-old widow, who like many Indonesians has just one name, and she looked for a moment out the open door of the shack. The smoke from forest fires was everywhere, an unimaginable cloud that stings the eyes and tightens the chest, like the plume from a campfire -- except that it blotted out the sun across hundreds of thousands of square miles in Southeast Asia and left the region with the ambiance of an ashtray. The smoke is a striking example of the public obliviousness in Asia to the health risks of the growing environmental disaster throughout the region, an obliviousness so profound that wives discount even the pollution that transforms them into widows. More fundamentally, the smoke has affected a half-dozen countries and demonstrates how, partly because of this obliviousness, Asia's filth is becoming increasingly cosmopolitan. Asian polluters are not merely sullying their own countries but are creating environmental catastrophes that cross international boundaries and create a burden for the entire planet. If the traditional paradigm of a pollution problem was a factory that dumped mercury in a lake, harming its immediate neighbors, the environmental headaches of the future increasingly will be regional and global challenges like global warming or acid rain. Asia will have to play a crucial role in the resolution of these problems, the most vexing of which is perhaps global warming, the topic of the international conference in Kyoto, Japan, that begins Dec. 1. Asia now is the source for only 17 percent of the greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide that are suspected of causing global warming, but its carbon dioxide emissions are rising at four times the world average. Just in the last few months, by one calculation, Indonesia's forest fires have released as much greenhouse gas as all the cars and power plants throughout Europe will emit this entire year. Fundamentally, Asia is so huge and is industrializing so quickly and is so dependent on coal and oil -- prime sources of carbon emissions -- that its share of greenhouse gas emissions is almost certain to overtake that of the West. The Asian Development Bank calculates that by the year 2020, the emissions will increase two to five times, depending in part on whether curbs are instituted. The Smoke  Students Can't See The BlackboardThe forest fires of Indonesia demonstrate the difficulty of grappling with transborder pollution. Malaysia and Singapore were particularly hard-hit, and their relatively well-educated populations were more aware of the dangers of breathing the smoke. But they were in effect the hostages of Indonesians who saw the problems as an inconvenience rather than a health crisis. At a junior high school in the city of Jambi on Sumatra, a few hundred students in tan uniforms swarmed about the open square in the middle of the school, none wearing face masks. Some played tag -- an ideal game, because the blanket of smoke made it easy to hide -- and teachers dismissed the haze as nothing more than a bother.''We have no health problems and no drop-off in attendance,'' Ratnajuwita, the matronly principal of a private school in Jambi, said in her office. ''Everyone is fine. The only problem is that we can't use the blackboards in the classrooms.''Why?''The smoke is so thick in the classrooms that students can't see what is written,'' Mrs. Ratnajuwita explained patiently. And then she smiled reassuringly and added, ''But there are no health problems.''Officials at the Government hospital in Jambi largely echo that line, describing the smoke as more of a nuisance than a hazard. But that may reflect Government policy more than medical fact, for in other countries periods of severe haze have been associated with sharp increases in short-term death rates, as well as long-term increases that are harder to measure. Twenty miles from Jambi, in the riverside village of Kumpeh, a cluster of wooden houses on stilts inaccessible except by footpath, the farmers have not been informed of the official line. They say that many of the village's 1,496 people are sick, and that three have died after bouts of coughing and fighting for breath. Most of the homes had their doors open, but Sukri's door was closed, and he was sitting morosely with his wife and children in the dark. Mr. Sukri, a 27-year-old farmer with dark brooding eyes, was struggling with the incomprehension any parent faces upon outliving a child.''When our baby was born, he was healthy,'' he said quietly, sullenly, as if still disbelieving that his 6-week-old son had died the previous day. ''Then he began to cough, and his chest seemed to hurt him. He cried a lot, and he lost his appetite. He was sick just a day and a night, coughing, heaving for his breath, and then he died.''Mr. Sukri paused and added with a shake of his head, ''It was so quick.''The baby's surviving sisters, 3 and 9 years old, sat beside their father, eyes stained but dry, coughing themselves.''It may have been the smoke,'' Mr. Sukri said resignedly, as if in a dream. ''But we don't know. We just don't know.''Neither does anyone else. The baby died and was buried without ever seeing a doctor -- the same fate as Mr. Ramli. Doctors consulted in other countries noted that it was impossible to make a precise diagnosis in such a case but added that the symptoms sounded as if they involved a respiratory ailment and that such levels of smoke would normally be associated with deaths from respiratory diseases. The Sumatran forest around these villages, so isolated in places that some tribesmen still blow poison darts from six-foot-long blowpipes to catch game, has been the scene of slash-and-burn agriculture for hundreds of years, but only since the 1980's has the smoke become a serious problem. This year was far worse than normal, partly because farmers and loggers were more aggressive in clearing land and partly because the monsoon rains did not arrive in the fall to put the fires out. The result was that the smoke spread as far as Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines, enclosing an area inhabited by 200 million people. The smoke may now be dissipating, but at its peak it devastated tourism throughout the region and harmed the regional economy, while also causing airplane, helicopter, car and boat crashes that killed hundreds. And no one knows how many people like Mr. Ramli or Mr. Sukri's son have died, or what the health effects will be on the countless millions of people who lived in the center of the ashtray for months, breathing in the smoke day after day. To hike through the villages of Sumatra is an eerie experience, the smoke hiding the tropical sun so that even mid-day feels like dusk. The woods are completely quiet, the birds refusing to chirp and even the monkeys sitting forlorn and silent in the trees. The Filth  Local Pollution, Global EffectsAsia's problems are so severe because pollution tends to reflect two fundamental forces: industrialization and increasing population density. The filthiest smoke and water arise in the early stages of industrialization, where most of Asia is now, and Asia's population is dense and growing rapidly. In that respect, the forest fires are an anomaly, for the worst problems tend to be in the new mega-cities, those with more than 10 million people. Asia has nine of the world's 14 mega-cities, including the biggest, Tokyo, and the fastest-growing, Dhaka, Bangladesh. If the image of Asia past is the timeless one of a peasant in a rice paddy, then the symbol of Asia in the coming decades may be of children playing in the rivulets of sewage that run through Dharavi, the gritty, smoky shantytown in Bombay, India, that is probably the biggest slum in the world. While the pollution in Dharavi will kill or harm primarily the people of Dharavi, some of the filth will reverberate around the world. The Kyoto conference underscores the attention being devoted to international concerns like global warming -- although, to be fair, Americans are the most profligate source of emissions, so that the people of New York threaten the citizens of Dharavi far more than the other way around. Some international environmental concerns are regional, like the air pollution particles and acid rain that originate in one country and then endanger people in neighboring countries. These are international but not quite global, for the air pollution from the Asian mainland is detectable in Hawaii but not in the continental United States. Then there are the genuinely global challenges, like global warming or the chlorofluorocarbon emissions that harm the ozone layer. China is now the largest source of those emissions, but it and all other countries are to halt production within a decade under an international treaty. A third challenge is the preservation of resources in the international ''commons,'' like oceans. And as one ponders the impact of a prospering Asia on these commons, a sobering sign of what is to come is coral reefs. Cantonese cuisine in southern China emphasizes the freshness of the ingredients, and any self-respecting Cantonese restaurant buys its fish live and keeps them in an aquarium until they are ready to be cooked. The economic boom in Hong Kong and southern China has meant a surge in the demand for live fish, and the easiest way for fishermen to catch live fish is to squirt a milky concentration of sodium cyanide into coral reefs. The cyanide kills the smaller fish but stuns the larger ones so that they can be easily netted and placed in large tanks in special fishing ships. The cyanide also kills the coral, and so over the last 15 years coral reefs throughout the Pacific have been severely damaged by the cyanide fishing. To dive along many of the pristine beaches of the Philippines today is to glide through empty, dead coral reefs that seem like ghost towns. Orange and red coral reefs where multi-colored fish used to flit about through the turquoise waters are now white coral corpses devoid of life. For all the environmental catastrophe under way in Asia, Westerners are in no position to feel superior. Indeed, Asian countries are a mess primarily because they have been outdoing the West in economic growth, and they are in fact paying more attention to environmental problems than Europe or America did at similar levels of per capita income. Even China has adopted sophisticated environmental laws -- albeit routinely unenforced -- and established an environmental protection office in every county, which is more than the United States has done. To be sure, the offices are normally feeble and ineffective, often protecting polluters more than the environment, but China's lukewarm efforts today still compare favorably with the inaction against the clouds of coal dust and smoke in American cities early in this century.''In spite of my lack of sympathy for the Chinese regime, at a comparable stage of development, we were doing less for the environment,'' said Vaclav Smil, a scholar at the University of Manitoba in Canada. Progress is evident amid the filth, and in the wealthier countries of Asia, there is hope that the worst is, if not over, at least in sight.''The pollution is getting worse and worse, but the speed of the deterioration of the air is slowing,'' said Lee Kark Bum, a presidential aide in charge of the environment in South Korea. ''So in South Korea we're expecting to get to the worst point around 2005, and then by 2015 the pollution will become less and less.''One open question is how the economic crisis in Asia over the last few months will affect the environment. It will probably slow the pace of industrialization -- and thus of environmental degradation -- but it may also lead to cost-cutting that reduces the sums spent on cleaning up the pollution.''For the next three to five years, the pressure on governments will be to adjust to weaker currencies, weaker stock markets and a general lack of trust on the part of international investors,'' said Peter Hills, director of an environmental studies center at Hong Kong University. ''That's going to push the environment aside.''Still, despite the economic difficulties, Asia is expected to continue to grow, and as it does so, one of the most encouraging environmental examples for the region is Japan. In the late 1960's, Japan was perhaps the most polluted country in the world, and then over the last 25 years it cleaned up its air and water and transformed itself into one of the least polluted and most energy-conscious nations in the industrialized world. The basic problem is simply that some other Asian countries are in part planning to follow Japan's trajectory precisely -- first create the filth, then clean it up later.''I think that's based on a false premise, that the only way to industrialize is to pass through the valley of the shadow of pollution, and then we'll come out rich on the other side,'' said Jonathan Lash, president of the World Resources Institute in Washington. Mr. Lash and other experts are almost unanimous that the old model is no longer valid, if it ever was, and that pollution-control steps can be taken even by poor countries to save money as well as lives. Sulfur emissions from the burning of Chinese coal, for instance, cause acid rain that causes an estimated $5 billion in damage annually to Chinese crops and forests, not counting damage farther downwind to Japan and South Korea. In Chongqing, a once-lovely Chinese city with some of the worst pollution in the country, the rain is so acid that it sometimes has a pH level of 3, roughly the same as Chinese vinegar. At this point, the economic damage to crops is so severe that China would save money by curbing sulfur emissions. Still, many pollution control measures -- like any investment -- require an up-front cost to generate returns later on. The Politics  Public Awareness Is Often LackingOne reason why many Asians are oblivious of the environmental risks, and therefore inclined to add to them, is that much of the region lacks a vigorous free press and dynamic political opposition to point out the problems. Even Malaysia, which is relatively democratic by Asian standards, banned scholars recently from making statements about the forest fire smoke without official approval. Education Minister Mohammed Najib bin Abdul Razak noted that one researcher had been quoted as saying that breathing the haze blown into Malaysia was equivalent to smoking 40 cigarettes a day. Mr. Najib denounced such findings as ''speculative in nature.''''Painting such a picture could give a negative image of Malaysia, causing a scare among Malaysians and preventing foreigners from coming to the country,'' he said. Yet while political freedom might boost reporting and discussion of pollution risks, it is equally clear that freedom itself is not enough. Another prerequisite is simply an environmental consciousness, for the Philippines is one of the most democratic countries in Asia, and yet it still uses leaded gasoline and has one of the worst environmental records around. This lack of consciousness means that while ordinary citizens may complain about the degradation, they are also among the biggest offenders. In the Indonesian forests, for instance, some of the fires were set by ordinary villagers -- people like Purwadi, a 42-year-old farmer near the Indonesian town of Kuala Tungkal. The area around his farm was already thick with smoke from other forest fires, so that even at mid-day a car must drive with lights, and there was Mr. Purwadi setting fire to another forest. A poor, uneducated man, Mr. Purwadi moved to this forest as a pioneer, building a shack and living without electricity or running water. He stood barefoot in the field, plumes of smoke rising all around him, and was happy to speak of the poisonous snakes in the grass and the wild pigs in the surrounding jungle. But the conversation grew strained when less tangible topics were raised. What about the health consequences of the burning forests, the impact on neighboring countries? Mr. Purwadi looked startled and paused a long time. He shuffled his feet and politely explained that he did not know about any of that.''There's no other way of clearing the land,'' he added. ''And I've got to plant my chilies.''

IN the debate over global warming, attention has focused mainly on how to reduce emissions of excess carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping industrial waste gases. Negotiators from more than 150 countries will convene tomorrow in Kyoto, Japan, to try to agree on just such cuts. But many experts are convinced that whatever action is taken, the world's political and economic systems are probably not capable of responding fast enough to keep carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere from rising, late in the next century, to about twice what they were when fossil fuels began to be spewed into the air during the Industrial Revolution in the late 18th century. If mainstream scientists are right, a doubling of carbon dioxide would mean that the world is already assured of a substantial rise in global temperatures and sea level, heavier rainstorms, more severe droughts and floods and a poleward shift of climatic zones. With that realization, the question of how well the world is prepared to adapt to climate change is gaining new attention.''We are pretty clearly going to be moving into uncharted territory in a world of doubled carbon dioxide concentrations,'' said Dr. Richard Moss, an expert with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an advisory group set up by the United Nations. ''Developing and implementing adaptation options seems to be a prudent course at this point.''While some strategies for coping with a different climate might be devised, it would probably not be possible to cushion all shocks. Such measures as building sea walls and planning for more efficient use of water in increasingly drought-prone areas, for instance, would go only so far. There will surely be winners as well as losers: while Canadian and Russian farmers might reap more wheat, African farmers might reap drought-induced disaster. While summer heat in the southern United States might be more intense, northern winters might be milder. The economies of entire regions -- tourist-dependent New England, for instance -- might be transformed with uncertain results. Adapting to climatic upheaval would surely involve great human and financial cost despite any planned measures. A Hardy SpeciesBut humans are a resilient species. They have always had to contend with climatic change and have often been profoundly affected by it. Conventional wisdom now holds that Homo sapiens owes its very existence to a climatic adaptation. According to this view, the onset of a drier ice-age climate in sub-Saharan Africa some 2.5 million years ago shrank forest cover, expanded grasslands and forced a certain species of pre-human to take up a two-legged life on the ground permanently, setting off an evolutionary chain of events that led directly to modern man. Much later, experts now believe, a similar drying so constricted natural food supplies in the Middle East that people were forced to begin cultivating grains -- a revolutionary adaptation that transformed human society and touched off a population expansion leading to human dominance of the planet. Still later, mega-droughts in both hemispheres destroyed several early empires that failed to adapt. In the Little Ice Age of the 15th to the 19th centuries, the inability of humans to adapt to extreme cold led to crop failures, starvation, mass migration and, in some instances, cannibalism. But despite the misery and cost, that same time (which was punctuated by some mild periods) was one of the most creative in history, the era of the late Renaissance, the Enlightenment, the American Revolution and the rise of the industrial economy. One way to get at the question of how to adapt to global warming is to ask how well modern people already deal with extreme events, like floods and droughts, that are expected to become even more extreme. ''The answer is, not well,'' said Dr. Michael H. Glantz, a social scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., who bases his conclusion on a number of case studies in the United States. The worst prospects are in developing countries, which in many ways are inherently more vulnerable. Countries like Bangladesh, Egypt, China and many small island countries, for instance, stand to see much or even all of their territory inundated by rising seas. At the same time, many third world populations, particularly in drought-prone countries, exist precariously close to the edge. Any increase in the length or severity of droughts could push them over -- and their countries' agriculture-dependent economies as well. To a great extent, the United States and other rich countries ''have managed to insulate ourselves from the vagaries of climate,'' said Dr. Peter Gleick, the director of the Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment and Security in Oakland, Calif. For instance, the United States has spent billions on reservoirs, dams, pipelines, aqueducts and irrigation systems that help smooth out the effects of climatic extremes on water supplies and floods. ''But people in most developing countries really live with the climate,'' said Dr. Gleick. ''If the rains fail, their crops fail. If the rivers flood, often they die.''Similarly, farmers in the United States have at their disposal a wealth of expertise and resources to help them adjust the kinds of crops they grow to cope with a new climate -- albeit at some cost. A farmer in much of Africa or in Bangladesh has nothing comparable. In North America, global warming would probably bring some benefits. Northern climes are already becoming greener as the world warms, and future warming might expand the continent's agricultural belt. Farmers farther south could switch crops; citrus fruits might replace field crops in Georgia, for example. Milder northern winters could cut the costs of heating and snow removal. But for every benign impact, according to the intergovernmental panel, there would be at least one negative counterpart. How will the New England tourist industry adjust, for instance, if brilliant fall foliage is replaced by duller oaks and hickories from farther south and ski slopes turn to slush? How disruptive and expensive would it be to progressively abandon beachfront developments as seas rise? What would be the impact of increased summer demand for air conditioning on power supplies and costs? Are public health agencies ready for an expected increase in heat-related deaths and possibly the migration of tropical diseases farther north? These questions are just beginning to be asked. The typical response to climate-related disaster has usually consisted of waiting until something bad happens and then scrambling to cope. Recent examples include the Mississippi River flood of 1993 and the Ohio River and North Dakota floods of 1997. If heavier rains and more severe droughts are in the cards, as the panel predicts, the vulnerability can only increase. But inertia is a powerful force: even after a big flood like those of the last few years, people continue to tempt fate by living on flood plains even though Federal policy now encourages them to move -- with one hand, anyway.  With the other, it encourages them to stay by insuring flood damage. In the end, there is probably only so much that can be done. ''I think there are limits to adaptation even in the rich countries,'' said Dr. Gleick. Experts have barely begun to probe what those limits are. Fifty or 100 years from now, if scientists' predictions about climate change turn out to be right, it may be that people will take the new climatic order in stride. How much pain, strain and cost lie between here and there is anything but certain.

MONDAY  Kyoto conference on global warming opens. The National Association of Purchasing Management releases November index.  The Commerce Department reports construction spending for October. TUESDAY  The Conference Board reports leading economic indicators for October. WEDNESDAY  The Commerce Department reports new home sales for October. THURSDAY  The Labor Department reports on productivity for the third quarter and on latest weekly unemployment claims. FRIDAY  The Labor Department announces unemployment rate for November. The Commerce Department announces factory orders for October.

After the Chrysler Corporation spent more than half a billion dollars to convert a car factory in Newark, Del., to produce big Dodge Durango sport utility vehicles, it threw a party in September to open the new assembly line. The state's political leaders stood with Chrysler's chairman on a podium decorated with red and white bunting and waved victoriously to hundreds of cheering auto workers whose jobs had been saved. When the Durango went on sale this fall, dealers could not keep enough in stock. And Chrysler, which barely breaks even on ordinary passenger cars, began pocketing $8,000 in profit for every Durango sold. There is just one problem: The Dodge Durango has a much worse environmental record than the full-sized sedan, the Dodge Intrepid, that the factory used to build. Its gasoline consumption and output of carbon dioxide, a principal cause of global warming, are 57 percent higher than those of the Intrepid. And the Durango's emissions of nitrogen oxides, the main cause of smog, are twice the level of the car it replaced. If the Durango and most other sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and mini-vans were classified as cars, they would violate Federal standards for pollution and gasoline consumption aimed at protecting the environment and conserving energy. Instead, these vehicles have long been classified as ''light trucks'' because they were once used mostly on farms and construction sites. Lawmakers, regulators and Presidents back to the Johnson Administration have granted special favors to makers and buyers of light trucks. Among those are rules for pollutants and fuel consumption that are considerably softer than those applied to cars for the last two decades. These lower standards remain in place even though light trucks now account for nearly one of every two family vehicles sold and even though most of them are used by suburban Americans simply for shopping and commuting. For years, American auto makers and their workers have waged a potent campaign to preserve the rules. Now, as President Clinton proposes to reduce American emissions of global warming gases to 1990 levels within a dozen years, the auto industry's lobbying is in high gear. The manufacturers are worried about a meeting -- beginning on Monday in Kyoto, Japan -- in which 166 nations will try to limit global warming, which has been linked to the burning of fossil fuels like gasoline. American emissions of global warming gases are increasing even faster than previously expected, in part because of the rise in popularity of sport utility vehicles and other gas-guzzling light trucks. These trucks will be the fastest-growing source of global warming gases in the United States over the next decade, according to a new study by an Environmental Protection Agency researcher, exceeding the increase in all industrial emissions combined. Already the emissions from 65 million light trucks match those from the 125 million cars on the road, the study found, and truck emissions are expected to move sharply ahead of those from cars in the years ahead. But auto makers oppose curbing gasoline consumption through higher gasoline taxes or tighter fuel-economy standards. On Oct. 2, the Big Three's chief executives and the president of the United Automobile Workers union met with President Clinton. Three weeks after that meeting, when the President announced his position on global warming, he conspicuously omitted any mention of restrictions on vehicles. That was only the latest case in which American car makers and their unionized workers have mobilized to protect the rules under which light trucks enjoy special privileges, including tax favors that provide incentives for auto makers to build light trucks and for Americans to buy them. That combined lobbying muscle has been highly effective. It was not that long ago, for example, that Bill Clinton, seeking voters with an environmental conscience during the 1992 Democratic primaries, called for the auto industry to achieve much higher fuel economy. Al Gore, his running mate, had even introduced a bill in 1989 requiring a 65 percent increase in the fuel efficiency of cars and light trucks as a way to reduce global warming. But after pressure from the U.A.W., the Big Three and attacks from politicians in auto manufacturing states, the Clinton-Gore team backed off. The auto makers have also set up lobbying groups like the Coalition for Vehicle Choice, which says it includes 6,000 other organizations and 35,000 people. The coalition has persuaded a broad range of nonprofit groups to join its efforts to influence regulators and politicians of both parties. But the industry does not need to spend a lot of money on coalitions or campaign contributions to achieve its goals. Virtually every Congressional district has auto dealerships, while auto assembly plants and parts factories have spread out of the Great Lakes region to the South and both coasts. General Motors and Ford are so enormous that they each produce more than 1 percent of the nation's economic output, the only two companies to do so. The 800,000-strong U.A.W. is a potent force in Democratic politics. So it is no surprise that the auto makers and union leaders generally encounter an open door when they call on lawmakers. Nor have the auto makers been shy about using their position as the nation's biggest advertisers to discourage the news media from criticizing light trucks. The industry, for instance, virtually stopped advertising in the Sierra Club's magazine after an article discussed the poor fuel economy of sport utility vehicles. Here are some of the ways that light trucks are given special treatment:*Most light trucks are allowed to emit 75 percent to 175 percent more smog-causing nitrogen oxides than even the biggest cars.*Each manufacturer is required to build a fleet of cars with an average fuel economy of 27.5 miles a gallon, but light trucks have to clear a bar of just 20.7 miles a gallon. Manufacturers can make their trucks much heavier and roomier while using fewer expensive but weight-saving aluminum parts. But those trucks consume far more gasoline than even the biggest cars and spew more gases that contribute to global warming.*The largest Chevrolet Suburbans and full-size pickups have become so heavy that they no longer even qualify as light trucks under the 22-year-old fuel-economy legislation. That means their fuel economies are not even calculated or included in the manufacturers' averages.*By building pickup trucks and mini-vans that can run on ethanol as well as gasoline, auto makers plan to win credits from the Government that will allow them to build more gas-guzzling light trucks -- even if buyers of the special vehicles never use ethanol, a type of alcohol made from grain and extremely rare at filling stations.*Until 1989, American-made sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and mini-vans were protected from foreign competition by a Federal tax on imported light trucks that was 10 times as high as the tax on imported cars. That high tax of 25 percent still applies to imported pickups. So American auto makers have been under less competitive pressure to develop cleaner, more fuel-efficient trucks, as they had to do with cars.*Light trucks are exempt from the Federal gas-guzzler tax, which covers cars that get less than 22.5 miles a gallon and can add as much as $7,700 to the price of some expensive sedans and sports cars.*People who use fairly large light trucks on the job -- even real estate agents carrying nothing bulkier than brochures in Lincoln Navigator sport utility vehicles -- are allowed to claim larger tax deductions than people using cars for business.*A lot of bigger light trucks are exempt from the Federal tax on luxury vehicles, now 8 percent of the amount of the sale price that exceeds $36,000. Many of these special arrangements for light trucks were made during the energy conservation movement of the 1970's, when only 20 million light trucks were on the road, and they were mainly commercial vehicles. Lawmakers and regulators focused on making cars cleaner and more fuel efficient because there were so many more of them. But as light trucks have become the vehicle of choice among millions of families who use them just like cars, they have grown from one-sixth of those sold to almost half. Today, the 65 million light trucks on the road are more than triple the number in 1975, while the number of cars on the road has only risen by a third since then. For struggling American auto makers, trounced in the 1970's and 1980's by their Japanese and European competitors, light trucks have been a miracle, propelling them from dismal results to record earnings. Detroit and its workers rightly credit light trucks with saving thousands of jobs. Yet light trucks pose significant problems -- and not just prodigious gasoline consumption. Without the shift toward more and bigger light trucks, the United States would find it easier to make the reductions in global warming gases to 1990 levels that the rest of the world is demanding. Cars and light trucks accounted for nearly one-fifth of American emissions of these gases in 1990, and their emissions are projected to rise by as much as 55 percent by 2010 if the surge in light trucks continues. The emissions would rise by only 35 percent if light trucks were no more popular than they were in the 70's. As for pollutants that cause smog, regulators in California, which is allowed to set its own tougher standards, have concluded that light-truck exhaust may prevent them from reaching Federal goals for smog reduction and are quietly planning to crack down. Finally, because light trucks consume so much gasoline, they make the United States more dependent on foreign oil at a time when oil imports are at record levels. Government Response  All Remains Quiet On Washington FrontThe auto industry has not encountered much resistance to the special treatment of light trucks. The Government has raised the fuel-economy standard for light trucks by just two-tenths of a mile a gallon over the last decade, to 20.7 miles a gallon from 20.5. Since 1995, Congress has barred further increases. And while the Government tightened standards for nitrogen oxide emissions for both cars and light trucks several years ago and is planning to tighten them further, the standards remain far more lax for trucks. The Clinton Administration, having backed away from calls for raising fuel-economy standards, has instead focused on supporting research into more fuel-efficient vehicles. The Government has been giving the auto industry $250 million a year since 1994 to pay for such work. Yet the research has mainly focused on producing a prototype car by 2003 that can travel up to 80 miles a gallon. Light-truck designs have received little attention even though they have emerged as the bigger problem. Asked about the issue, President Clinton and Vice President Gore responded through spokesmen that they would have considered increasing fuel-economy standards if not prevented by Congress. ''The industry raised a fuss, and Congress stopped it,'' said Barry Toiv, the deputy White House press secretary. But the Administration has done little to oppose Congress. Environmental groups have also given the light-truck issue low priority because they think they have little chance of success. For now, they are making only sporadic efforts to raise public awareness.''Getting Congress and this President to control sport utility pollution is like pushing a Chevy Suburban uphill with your nose,'' said Daniel Becker, the energy policy director of the Sierra Club. That so little has been done about these problems in Washington is a reflection of the fact that Detroit is giving people what they want. Americans -- even ones who fancy themselves as environmentally conscious -- have fallen in love with trucks. Take Henry E. Douglas, a 39-year-old engineer from Hyattsville, Md., who is single. After many years of keeping the heat low in winter to save energy, Mr. Douglas compromised with his principles this autumn. He traded in his 1994 Subaru wagon for a 1994 Land Rover Discovery that goes 14 miles on a gallon of gasoline, half as far as the Subaru, and produces twice the pollutants. Mr. Douglas picked the sport utility vehicle so he could drive from his home to New England ski slopes in even the nastiest weather. ''I feel guilty about buying this big truck to drive around in, and I have caught flak from friends for it,'' he said. ''I did a little good old American backsliding, as I think a lot of people have done lately.''The fall in the price of gasoline, after inflation is taken into account, has taken the economic pinch out of driving light trucks. For a family that drives 15,000 miles a year, owning a Suburban, which sells for $26,000 and up, now costs only $550 more in annual gasoline bills than driving a Honda Accord, or less than $50 a month. Light trucks have many other attractions. They are stylish. They are roomier than cars, with the largest sport utility vehicles carrying nine people. Sitting above the cars around them, they give drivers a sense of power. They make passengers feel safer, although they are more prone to flipping. Yet because they have grown much heavier relative to cars over the last 20 years, and because they tend to ride higher, light trucks inflict heavy damage when they collide with cars. Even though there are twice as many cars in use as trucks, the trucks now kill more people in cars each year than other cars do. Two big insurers have already begun raising liability rates for light trucks, and others plan to do so. Auto makers are nonetheless building light-truck factories and converting old car factories on the assumption that within a few years half the vehicles sold will be light trucks. Sales of the biggest sport utility vehicles are growing fastest of all. With the introduction of models like the Ford Expedition and Lincoln Navigator, sales of full-size sport utility vehicles soared 53 percent in the first nine months of this year compared with figures from the same period a year earlier, even as car sales fell 4 percent. Americans' infatuation with light trucks alarms some Federal and state regulators. A quick comparison of specific models shows why. Both gasoline consumption and emissions of carbon dioxide are 86 percent higher for a Chevrolet Suburban than for a Honda Accord, and 43 percent higher for the Suburban than for even the huge Buick Roadmaster station wagon that General Motors built until last year. The cleanest Suburbans emit twice the nitrogen oxides of the Accord or the Roadmaster. The E.P.A.'s expert on light-truck emissions, John German, has calculated in a new study that because of the shift to light trucks, Government forecasts of nitrogen oxide pollution from family vehicles in 2020 should be raised by 6 percent to 23 percent. Projections for carbon dioxide emissions and gasoline consumption by 2010 should be raised by 8 percent. The forecasts have been based until now on the outdated assumption that light trucks would be less than a third of the passenger vehicles in use through 2015, when they already exceed 34 percent. Regulators in California, which has 7.5 million light trucks, said they would begin drafting rules to require trucks to meet the same antismog standards as cars by 2008. ''We did not expect trucks to be this popular,'' said Steven G. Albu, chief of automotive engineering studies at the California Air Resources Board. ''It undermines our efforts to get to the Federal clean air goals.''How It All BeganChicken Came First, Then Truck RulesFor light trucks, the long line of favors from Washington all started with frozen chickens. Beginning in 1962, the Kennedy Administration accused the European Community of unfairly restricting imports of American poultry at the request of West German chicken farmers. In January 1964, two months after taking office, President Johnson punished the Europeans by imposing a 25 percent tax on all imported light trucks. The official reason given for choosing light trucks was that American imports of Volkswagen vans from West Germany were close in dollar value to the lost American sales of chickens to Europe. But recently released audio tapes from the Johnson White House suggest that the President may have had another motive. The tapes show that in January 1964, President Johnson was trying to persuade Walter Reuther, the U.A.W.'s president, not to call a strike just before the 1964 election and to support the President's civil rights agenda. The tapes also show that Mr. Reuther wanted President Johnson to respond to Volkswagen's growing shipments to the United States, although the labor leader was more concerned with the Beetle than the vans. Through three rounds of global trade negotiations since then, import fees on virtually every other manufactured good except clothing and textiles have been reduced to 2 percent or 3 percent or have been eliminated. But Detroit has lobbied effectively to protect the light-truck tariff. During the most recent round, which concluded in 1993, the American auto industry warned that it would withhold its support from any agreement that reduced the 25 percent tariff that remained on many light trucks, said a senior Bush Administration trade official who insisted on anonymity. The Bush Administration followed the industry's wishes despite complaints from Japan. To this day, the tax remains at 25 percent for imported pickup trucks, although the Government has reduced it to 2.5 percent for mini-vans and sport utility vehicles -- on the ground that they are not trucks. But Washington continues to classify them as light trucks for all other purposes. The tax has helped prevent European and Asian auto makers from winning a firm foothold in the light-truck market; they are only now catching up by building pickup and sport utility vehicle factories in the United States. While Detroit held only 64 percent of the nation's car market last year, the Big Three sold 86 percent of the light trucks. The barriers to competition have meant less pressure on Detroit to make its models cleaner and more fuel efficient, two strengths of Japanese car makers. The import tax was just the first of many special favors. The 1973 Arab oil embargo led Congress to set gasoline mileage rules for cars. But the auto industry allied itself with farmers and home builders who said that similar standards for pickup trucks would pose an intolerable burden by forcing auto makers to make the trucks smaller and less powerful. So Congress asked the Transportation Department to come up with a separate set of rules for light trucks. Enthusiasm for regulation has faded as worries about oil shortages have ebbed. Fuel-economy standards for cars rose to 27.5 miles a gallon in 1985 while truck standards have barely changed. In 1975, when Congress passed the fuel-economy legislation, the average fuel economy of new light trucks was 13 percent below cars. Now, it is 25 percent lower. The rules, combined with rising gasoline prices, forced Detroit to design much smaller cars in the late 1970's and early 80's. But when gasoline prices dropped after 1981, Lee Iacocca and Harold K. Sperlich, Chrysler's chief executive and president, respectively, made use of the opportunity provided by the separate rules for trucks. In 1984, they introduced the mini-van. Had it been classified as a car, the mini-van would have made it hard for Chrysler to meet fuel-economy standards for its fleet. But because it was at least partly based on a pickup design, and came in a cargo version, too, regulators accepted it as a truck. With America hungering for roomier family vehicles again, the eight-passenger mini-van was an instant success, rescuing Chrysler from the brink of disaster. Ford then set off the sport utility vehicle surge with the introduction of the Explorer in 1990. Now that they are selling ever-bigger  sport utility vehicles, Chrysler and Ford are having trouble meeting even the lower fuel-economy standard for light trucks. So they plan to build more than 200,000 mini-vans and pickups annually that can burn ethanol as well as gasoline. This will allow them to take advantage of generous Government fuel-economy credits for such vehicles, even if the buyers never use ethanol. Why ethanol? Ethanol is commonly made from corn; corn farmers and processors successfully lobbied Congress in 1988 to insert the loophole into fuel-economy laws as a way to increase demand for corn. While the auto makers were not especially interested in ethanol then, they were happy to go along. Now they see a way to benefit. Environmentalists paid little attention to light trucks when fuel-economy rules were enacted or when clean air legislation was drafted during the Carter Administration. ''We weren't smart enough in the 1977 legislation to take on the light-truck issue,'' said Michael P. Walsh, director of the E.P.A.'s air-and-radiation division from 1977 to 1981. Congress also failed to foresee the popularity of light trucks in writing tax laws. When the gas-guzzler tax was drafted in 1978, House members from rural districts insisted that light trucks be exempt to protect farmers' pickups, said Albert Buckberg, a longtime economist for the Joint Committee on Taxation who has since retired. Because the larger light trucks were not seen as luxurious, they were also exempted from the luxury vehicle tax in 1990. Times have changed. Even the American Automobile Manufacturers Association concedes that only a quarter of light trucks are now used for farming and other commercial purposes. In just the last year, luxury-car makers have been rushing out deluxe sport utility models like the Lincoln Navigator, at $40,000 and up, and the Mercedes-Benz ML320, priced at $35,000 to $40,000. Cadillac announced plans on Nov. 20 for a huge new model next year. When the tax laws were written, Mr. Buckberg said, ''There were no such things as the Lincoln Continentals of sport utility vehicles.''Fending Off ThreatsAggressive Lobbying At All Political LevelsThe year was 1990, and Iraq had just invaded Kuwait, raising fears that the oil lifeline between the Middle East and the United States would be cut. That crisis, and fears about global warming, produced a serious effort by Senator Richard H. Bryan, Democrat of Nevada, to raise fuel-economy standards for cars and light trucks by 40 percent by 2001. The measure won the support of 57 senators but fell three votes short of the total needed to defeat a filibuster. To help head off the legislation, the Big Three hired a lobbying firm, FMR Group Inc., which organized a campaign of grass-roots resistance in Nevada. Detroit auto makers hired another lobbyist in 1990, John R. Bonner, to drum up opposition to the Bryan bill in other states. Mr. Bonner set up a news conference in Washington and invited representatives of groups that used big vehicles. A Nebraska farmer pointed out that a Honda Civic could not haul a livestock trailer. A charity official from South Dakota said disabled people needed big vans for their wheelchair lifts. An Alabama sheriff said small cars could not be driven as fast to crime scenes. Each speaker's plane fare and expenses were paid for by the auto makers, Mr. Bonner said. To help block any further moves to raise fuel-economy standards, the auto industry set up a lobbying group in Washington in 1991 called the Coalition for Vehicle Choice and has bankrolled its budget ever since. The coalition is headed by Diane K. Steed, the top highway safety regulator in the Reagan Administration. The next threat to light trucks came during the 1992 campaign of Bill Clinton and Al Gore. Mr. Clinton criticized President Bush for not raising fuel-economy standards. But once Mr. Clinton had won the Democratic nomination with the support of environmentalists, his position began to shift. Auto industry and U.A.W. officials met repeatedly with campaign advisers through the summer to contend that raising fuel standards would eliminate jobs -- and cost the votes of tens of thousands of auto workers. At a campaign stop in Detroit on Aug. 21, Mr. Clinton said that while he wanted more fuel-efficient vehicles, they might not be technically feasible -- the justification later used for subsidizing industry research instead of raising fuel-economy standards. And the auto makers are not reluctant to retaliate against opponents of sport utility vehicles, like the Sierra Club, one of the few public interest groups actively fighting the spread of the vehicles. The club's bimonthly magazine, Sierra, carried ads for sport utility vehicles until it published an article last winter criticizing their poor fuel economy. All of the sport utility ads disappeared, costing the magazine 7 percent of its annual advertising revenue, according to Joan N. Hamilton, the editor in chief.''We had to shrink the pages of our magazine accordingly,'' she said. The magazine has continued to publish articles critical of the auto industry. For many years, Detroit's lobbying in Washington followed one rule: call Representative John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who is the longest-serving House member and served as Commerce Committee chairman for 14 years. When Republicans captured control of the House and Senate in the 1994 elections, Mr. Dingell lost his chairmanship. But the auto industry has lost none of its influence and may have even increased its sway. Many Republicans have long shared the auto makers' hostility to regulation. The auto industry's political contributions, while modest compared with those of other industries, have long gone lopsidedly to Republicans. The manufacturers' latest worry is the conference on global warming. The theory of global warming predicts that the buildup of certain gases in the atmosphere will lead to less of the sun's energy being reflected from earth into space, resulting in a warmer climate. While some scientists have questioned whether global warming is a serious enough problem to justify costly policy moves now, there is broad scientific agreement that some problem exists. The auto makers fear pressure on the United States to curb gasoline consumption through higher gasoline taxes or higher fuel-economy standards. The result has been aggressive lobbying, including in October, when President Clinton met with the Big Three's chief executives and the U.A.W.'s president, Stephen Yokich. The White House had hoped that the auto makers would thank the President for trying to break open the Korean auto market. But the executives spent most of the hourlong meeting criticizing the Administration's desire to secure a binding international agreement in Kyoto. Only the United States, with its strong legal system, would  respect such an agreement, they warned, and at the expense of slower economic growth and the loss of thousands of jobs. But the lobbying extends far beyond meetings with the President. The Durango assembly line party looked like a campaign event, and in a way it was, part of the industry's unending effort to cultivate allies at all levels of politics. Thomas R. Carper, the Democratic Governor of Delaware, pointed out in his speech that Chrysler's $623 million investment to convert the factory to sport utility vehicle production was the equivalent of $1,000 for every person in the state. Asked minutes later about the environmental issues surrounding light trucks, the Governor volunteered to help Chrysler fight any restrictions.''If they need our help,'' he said, ''we'll give it to them.''After the ceremony, Robert Liberatore, Chrysler's chief lobbyist and a former top Democratic Senate aide, steered Senator Joseph Biden, a Democrat, toward a lunch with Robert Eaton, Chrysler's chairman and chief executive, and Delaware's other Senator, William Roth Jr., a Republican. Asked later what they had talked about, the Senators said the conversation had mainly involved Chrysler's interest in free trade. But when pressed, Senator Biden said Mr. Eaton had also spoken to him about the dangers of raising fuel-economy standards. A Widening Constituency  Country Truck, City TruckThe Everly family near Bondurant, Iowa, has been using pickups to farm since the 1920's and cannot imagine life without them. Last spring, James L. Everly used his pickup to haul seed corn and herbicides to his fields. This autumn, he used it to transport his crops to a grain elevator.''You couldn't use a sedan or a wagon because you'd get stuck in the mud,'' Mr. Everly said. By contrast, Andrew and Jillian Dijak in Westport, Conn., have other expectations for their truck. They traded in their Audi two years ago to lease a Range Rover. They  thought the big sport utility vehicle would provide more protection in an accident. Now they are on the waiting list for a Mercedes-Benz sport utility vehicle. ''Winters can be harsh here, and I have two young children,'' Mrs. Dijak said. ''I thought being higher would be safer than the Audi.''Auto makers are designing many light trucks these days for two different markets: the original customers who use them as work vehicles and the newcomers who view them as oversize cars. People who need work vehicles want the features they have always counted on -- powerful engines, four-wheel drive and sturdy frames -- to negotiate muddy fields or rough roads. But commuters, along with soccer moms and dads, also want air-conditioning, luxurious interiors and fast acceleration. The auto makers are granting their wishes, making the trucks even heavier and requiring more powerful, gas-guzzling engines. The horsepower of the average light truck has soared 48 percent in the last decade. Chrysler has begun offering a new engine in the Jeep Grand Cherokee that allows it to go from zero to 60 miles an hour in seven seconds -- as fast as a 1978 Corvette. Most sport utility vehicles and pickups have blocky shapes that make them less aerodynamic, reducing their energy efficiency. Popular four-wheel-drive systems, which allow better control on bad or snowy roads, likewise hurt fuel economy by adding up to 500 pounds of weight. Light trucks even have taller, less aerodynamic passenger compartments than cars -- a peculiar remnant of the days when men wore hats.''In Texas, you have to be able to wear your cowboy hat,'' said Tom Baughman, Ford's truck engineering director. Many light trucks, particularly the larger sport utility vehicles and pickups, are designed to carry heavy cargoes or haul trailers, and have fuel-gulping engines. But an internal study by the Big Three has found that slightly less than half of full-size sport utility vehicles, and only 15 percent of all sport utility vehicles, are used for towing. Full-size sport utility vehicles may be handy for carrying big families, but three-quarters of the buyers come from households with three or fewer people. Environmental ProblemsHigher Emissions, Lower Fuel EconomyTo build trucks sturdy enough to satisfy farmers like Mr. Everly and peppy enough to please former car drivers like the Dijaks, auto makers have developed bigger and bigger engines. But there are drawbacks. Two decades of progress in reducing emissions of smog-causing nitrogen oxides from family vehicles is being slowed by the shift from cars to light trucks. For light trucks as a group, actual emissions are 20 percent to 100 percent higher than for cars as a group, with the exact figure ranging from city to city based on the severity of auto inspections, according to the E.P.A.Nobody says light trucks have to be this dirty. Mr. Albu of the California Air Resources Board said that regulators planned to outfit a Ford F-150 pickup with a better catalytic converter in an experiment intended to show that trucks can meet even the strictest car emissions standards. The upgraded catalytic converters could end up costing manufacturers $100 to $300 a vehicle, said John Dunlap, the agency's chairman. The E.P.A. is required by a 1990 law to cut allowable nitrogen oxide emissions for cars and light trucks in 2004, but has not decided by how much. All but the smallest light trucks also burn a lot of gasoline. Many auto executives say that Americans are not worried about conserving gas. When Chrysler introduced the Durango, which gets 13 miles to the gallon in the city and 17 on the highway, Mr. Eaton declared, ''Fuel economy within the area we're talking about here is not an issue to the consumer.''American gasoline use is already expected to grow by up to 33 percent by 2010. If light trucks become as common as cars by then, gasoline consumption will be an additional 8 percent higher than if light trucks remained a third of the vehicles on the road, according to the study by Mr. German of the E.P.A.'s automotive pollution office in Ann Arbor, Mich. If Americans were still buying the same proportion of light trucks as in 1975, and if these light trucks had improved in fuel economy as quickly as cars since then, gasoline consumption and carbon dioxide emissions by cars and light trucks in the United States would already be 9.3 percent lower today, according to calculations by John M. DeCicco, a senior researcher at the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy in Washington. That translates into 600,000 barrels of oil a day, or 3.3 percent of national oil consumption. Many environmentalists have advocated tightening fuel-economy rules. The auto makers and most economists disagree. Higher gas taxes, they point out, would limit the miles people drove. Light trucks are far less popular in Europe because gasoline there costs up to $5 a gallon after taxes are included. In the United States, said Alex Trotman, Ford's chairman and chief executive, ''if fuel were $3 a gallon, for example, I think you'd see a very different distribution of size of vehicles, car and truck.''Yet higher gasoline taxes are unlikely, particularly with the Federal budget nearly in balance. Higher fuel-economy standards for light trucks are also unlikely. So for now, light-truck sales keep climbing. ''We are in the business,'' Mr. Trotman said, ''of supplying customers what they'd like to buy.''

Of all the many issues in the talks that begin here Monday on cutting emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases, none carries more considerations of ethics and morality than the question of how big a burden the third-world countries should bear -- and how soon they should take it up. No issue is more likely to torpedo the chances of a successful agreement. Yet some experts see cause for hope that an accord between rich and poor might eventually be struck, if not here in Kyoto, then later. The poorer nations have long occupied the moral high ground. They insist that since the rich countries got rich largely by burning the coal and oil that produce the heat-trapping carbon dioxide, and since they are still responsible for most emissions today, it is only right that the wealthy be the first to take legally binding steps to reduce them. They point out that third-world countries stand to be hurt worst by whatever climate changes result from the rich countries' emissions, and they argue that they are hard-pressed enough to assure a decent existence for hundreds of millions of their people. President Clinton and the United States Senate, which will vote on any agreement, raise their own fairness issue. They insist that because warming of the atmosphere by greenhouse gases is a global concern, all countries must share in the solution. This is particularly so, they argue, since third-world countries' emissions are expected to surpass those of the rich countries in 20 or 30 years. The United States insists it will sign no agreement unless all countries take part in a ''meaningful'' way. For the first time since the signing of a global climate treaty at Rio de Janeiro in 1992, legally binding limitations on greenhouse emissions will be under consideration here. The American stance has provoked counterarguments in the vein of a recent statement by Dr. Mark Mwandosya of Tanzania, chairman of the developing-country caucus in the talks.''Very many of us are struggling to attain a decent standard of living for our peoples,'' he said, ''and yet we are constantly told that we must share in the effort to reduce emissions so that industrialized countries can continue to enjoy the benefits of their wasteful life style.''The issue is more complicated -- and possibly less intractable -- than it might seem on the surface. The arguments conceal factors believed by many, including Dr. Mwandosya, to contain elements of a constructive approach. One good sign, the third-world  countries say, is that they have already lessened the rates at which their emissions are increasing. A recent study by the World Resources Institute, a Washington-based research organization, found that many key third-world countries, have cut or eliminated energy subsidies and as a result are emitting less carbon dioxide than they otherwise would have. Cutting the subsidies has raised energy costs and thereby discouraged the burning of coal and oil. The pricing changes were undertaken for economic reasons, not environmental ones, the report said, but the effect on carbon emissions was the same.''It appears,'' the study reported, ''that developing countries are already doing a great deal to limit emissions -- a fact largely overlooked in the current debate.''Encouraging Signs In Third WorldDr. Mwandosya said in a recent interview that he believed the reported reductions would be evident when third-world countries make their first official emissions inventories, over the next two years, as required by the 1992 Rio treaty. While the treaty does not impose on the poorer countries any targets and timetables for emissions cuts, it does require them in general to rein in emissions. The 1992 treaty required industrialized countries, on the other hand, to aim at a specific goal of reducing emissions to 1990 levels by 2000. Most countries, including the United States, will fail to meet this voluntary target. Two and a half years ago, the conference of the parties to the treaty agreed in Berlin that the original goal was inadequate and began the long negotiating process that is to conclude in Kyoto. The Berlin agreement specifically exempted third-world countries from having to do more more than what the treaty's general provisions specify. As a result, the poorer countries have resolutely refused to consider any new commitments in eight sessions of talks leading up to Kyoto. But the final round here will involve the full conference of the parties again, and the issue of new commitments for third-world countries could be taken up formally. In addition to whatever progress the poorer countries have made in reducing emissions, there is another reason for encouragement, in Dr. Mwandosya's view. He cited the ''natural phenomenon'' by which third-world countries have historically followed the rich nations' lead in economic and technological development. A variety of existing technologies, many experts say, could reduce emissions either by burning fossil fuels more efficiently or by replacing fossil fuels with alternative energy sources like solar or wind power. That is why, Dr. Mwandosya said, it was important ''for the developed countries to create a momentum --  we normally follow the momentum.''  This could allow third-world countries to leapfrog the fossil-fuel stage of economic development by adopting more efficient energy technologies and alternatives to fossil fuels -- if the rich countries lead the way in applying them. On the whole, they have so far failed to do this. There are some moves afoot to leapfrog fossil fuels. Often they are portrayed as ''win-win'' solutions in which the twin goals of economic development -- the poor nations' priority -- and cleaner energy can be furthered. Vast rural areas in the third world are without electricity, for instance, and providing it without resorting to fossil fuels is one way to serve both needs. Hundreds of thousands of households in Africa and Indonesia are in fact being equipped with solar power in projects sponsored by the United Nations Development Program, the Global Environmental Facility and the World Bank. The trick in spreading alternative energy sources is to remove economic barriers to their adoption, said Anders Wijkman, a policy expert with the United Nations Development Program. Among the toughest barriers, he said, are remaining subsidies that keep oil and coal inexpensive and lack of access to financing for people who want to invest in alternatives like solar energy. One reason poorer countries are so reluctant to take on specific reduction targets just now, said Dr. Mwandosya, is that they are unsure that they could meet them, given a scarcity of the money and technology necessary to do so, although the 1992 Rio treaty provides for the transfer of both. A number of ''joint implementation'' projects have been tried on a pilot basis: a business or government in a rich country finances or provides the technology for a specific emissions reduction project in a third-world country. The idea is that reductions can be made more inexpensively in a poor country than in a rich one. It makes no difference to the atmosphere, since greenhouse gases mix globally. Eventually, if parties to the 1992 treaty so decide, the rich countries would get credit for emissions reductions even though they take place somewhere else. Fears That Some Would Reap AdvantageFull-scale joint implementation for credit could be one element of a Kyoto agreement on the third-world countries' role. But fearing that rich countries would use the plan as an excuse for doing nothing to reduce their own emissions, many poor nations have been skeptical. The issue is complicated by the fact that third-world countries are in varying stages of development. They range from the poorest of the poor to countries on the verge of breaking into the predominantly industrialized world, like China, India, South Korea and Mexico, with many degrees and combinations of circumstances in between. And many of the countries, in all stages of development, are much more urgently concerned with growing and festering air and water pollution, locally and regionally, than with the seemingly more remote problem of global climate change. American businesses that depend heavily on energy use say that third-world countries, particularly the better-off ones, would reap a competitive advantage in the world economy if they were absolved from mandatory emissions cuts and American businesses were not. Some labor unions fear that that would force companies to shift more operations overseas at the cost of jobs in the United States. Industry-backed studies support that view. But a recent study by the World Resources Institute found that even in energy-intensive industries, energy costs are just one factor -- and one too small to make much difference -- among many that are considered when when decisions are made on where to produce goods. Moreover, the study found, rising energy prices in third-world countries are narrowing and perhaps eliminating whatever cost advantage those countries may have. It concluded that ''differentiated commitments for developed and developing countries can work without compromising U.S. economic competitiveness.''Wealthy Countries To Lead the WayThe idea of tailoring reductions targets to individual countries' economic and social profiles, rather than a one-size-fits-all commitment, has gained some currency in the talks. But the third-world countries show no signs of backing off on their insistence that the rich nations show the way by undertaking specific commitments first. They have, in fact, laid on the table the most stringent proposal of all for industrialized countries: a 35-percent emissions reduction by 2020. The size and timing of cuts by industrialized nations is at the heart of the Kyoto talks. But ''if we get that first round of commitments in Kyoto, I think we will be able to get the developing countries on board fairly soon after,'' said Dr. Kilaparti Ramakrishna of the Woods Hole Research Center in Woods Hole, Mass., who is an expert on international environmental law and has closely followed the talks. But he said the developing world is unlikely to follow until the rich countries have demonstrated that their cuts are actually being carried out. No one expects that the third-world countries should undertake the same reductions commitments as the rich ones initially, but what would satisfy the United States Senate is unclear. Ninety five Senators  signed a resolution last summer saying, among other things, that the United States should not sign any agreement unless it ''mandates new specific scheduled commitments'' by third-world countries to reduce emissions. The fact that time is short and the developing-country issue has not been formally dealt with until now may sharply limit what is possible in Kyoto. It may be, as a senior State Department official said recently, that only part of the problem can be solved now, with negotiations continuing beyond Kyoto. This article is one of a series that have appeared since Aug. 12 on the science, politics and economics of climate change with the approach of an international meeting in Kyoto, Japan, beginning tomorrow, to discuss limits on greenhouse gases.

INTERNATIONAL 3-19Asian Economic Stresses May Cause Political WavesAs its juggernaut stumbles, Asian frustrations could cause upheavals in politics and social life. The threat is causing apprehension in many countries. 1Czech Premier Steps DownPrime Minister Vaclav Klaus announced his Government's resignation, after a call to do so by President Vaclav Havel. Mr. Klaus, a noted reform economist, lost standing with a financial scandal in his party. 19OPEC Plans More OutputOPEC raised its oil production ceiling by 10 percent, despite fears within the group that the increase might hurt prices. But the increase is not as big as it appears, because the previous ceiling was widely violated. 5Indian Parties Try to RegroupIndia's main political parties maneuvered feverishly to cobble together a coalition to replace the 14-party Government that collapsed on Friday. 9Political Surprise in TaiwanTaiwan's governing party suffered surprising losses in local elections. 12The Divide in KyotoA divisive issue at the global warming talks opening Monday will be burden-sharing between rich and poor. But there is some hope that the issue might be resolved. 6Challenge to Congo's LeaderSix months in power, Laurent Kabila's Government faced its first direct challenge, in shootouts that killed as many as 18 people. 15Germany's Melting PotAlmost 9 percent of Germany's population are foreigners, but Germany resists talk of a melting pot. 3NATIONAL 20-43Plans to Test Medicines In Children Draws Dissent  Opposition has erupted over a proposal by President Clinton that would require drug companies to test their products in children before putting new medicines on the market. Mr. Clinton says such studies will improve health care for children, but drug companies say the proposal would needlessly put thousands of children at risk. 1Who Gets Water in the WestFrom the Colorado River to California's Central Valley, water from the subsidized farms and playgrounds created by Government irrigation is being diverted to nearly extinct wildlife, long-forgotten Indian tribes and cities that barely existed when the big dams and canals were built. 1Trucks Favored by the LawIf most sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and mini-vans were classified as cars, they would violate Federal standards for pollution and gasoline consumption aimed at protecting the environment and conserving energy. Instead, lawmakers have granted special favors to makers and buyers of light trucks. 1A Cookie Jar on WheelsThere has never been a human fatality or serious mauling by a black bear in Yosemite National Park. There have been, however, 600 car break-ins this year, causing over $500,000 in damage, from bears drawn by careless campers who leave food on seats and in trunks. 20Gay Foster Parent DebateA Texas child welfare supervisor's decision to remove a baby boy from the care of a foster parent who is a lesbian has focused attention on a 118-year-old state statute that makes homosexual activity a crime. 20NEW YORK/REGION 45-50Investment Fraud SpreadsInvestment fraud is spreading across the country, with New York at its center, according to law enforcement officials and securities regulators. The fraud involves the sale of marginal companies' low-priced stocks to amateur investors who are besieged by telephone sales calls. While the victims are usually told that the company in question is the next Microsoft or McDonald's, the shares they buy often turn out to be worthless. 1Perilous CyclistsThe sight of restaurant deliverymen on beat-up bicycles riding on sidewalks or going the wrong way on one-way streets is increasingly common. And the frequent near misses and occasional, harrowing accidents, like the death of a 68-year-old pedestrian who was struck on an Upper West Side sidewalk by a deliveryman, illuminate the conflicting demands of speed and safety. 45Brooklyn's WoodlandsBrooklyn's last forest, which is in Prospect Park, is being restored to the ''rich, dark, cool'' woodland envisioned by the park's designers, Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux. The project includes rustic bridges, three waterfalls and thousands of new plants, trees and shrubs. 47OBITUARIES 52-53Richard R. RuoppA president emeritus of Bank Street College and a specialist in early childhood education and day care who adapted up-to-date technologies for the classroom, was 65. 53Jack BerryA Tennessee-born New York businessman and the last of the Florida citrus barons who transformed the industry in the 1960's, was 81. 52TV Update 51Weather 50

WHAT, Americans worry? To the frustration of environmental activists, the still-distant risks from global warming have yet to grab the attention of Main Street. But to many economists, the difficulty in mobilizing public support to meet America's international commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2010 may yet prove a blessing. For while some of the skepticism about the virtue of quick, decisive action is coming from the energy and auto industries, most independent experts also urge a long, hard look before we leap. To be sure, there may well be easy opportunities to slow global warming through bottom-up steps like better insulation and modest changes in agricultural methods. But crash programs, most economists  argue, are apt to increase the cost of containing emissions without increasing the benefits. More important, they question the logic of diverting vast economic resources from other uses without a better understanding of the payoff. ''The most effective policy won't be the most dramatic,'' cautioned Robert N. Stavins, an environmental economist at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. The economists' immediate concern is the difficulty of slowing emissions without support from China, India, Brazil and a half-dozen other big emerging economies. While Europe, America and Japan are heavy emitters of greenhouse gases, it's widely agreed that the cheap fixes lie elsewhere. William Nordhaus, an economist at Yale University, estimates that bribing or bullying the developing world to switch to energy-saving, carbon-sparing technologies -- things like insulating buildings and generating electricity with natural gas rather than coal -- would get the job done for one-ninth the cost of squeezing comparable emissions out of the developed economies. His computer simulations suggest that cutting emissions in the United States back to 1990 levels by 2010 would require a doubling of energy prices, ''more than the price run-up during the two oil crises,'' he noted. Just as costly as doing it in the wrong place would be doing it at the wrong pace. A blitzkrieg on emissions, compared with a more deliberate effort to pick the low-hanging fruit first, would require that relatively new carbon-emitting capital -- power plants, industrial equipment and vehicles -- be scrapped rather than replaced gradually. And it would force countries, companies and consumers to adopt exotic greenhouse-friendly technologies like fuel cells before they are fully worked out -- or fully affordable. No less important, a rapid transition would tie up capital that could otherwise be used to increase productive capacity. A hundred billion here, a hundred billion there could add up to real money. Economists also note that while the debate in Kyoto is about annual levels of emissions, what matters in terms of climate change is the accumulated levels of greenhouse gases. Alan Manne of Stanford University and Richard Richels of the Electric Power Research Institute, a research organization in Palo Alto, Calif., that is supported by the power industry, compare two paths to stabilizing atmospheric carbon at 550 parts per million, double preindustrial levels, around the end of the 21st century. With the rapid transition mandated by current international agreements, annual emissions would peak at seven billion tons around 2050. But on a cost-minimizing path, the emissions would peak at 10 billion tons but then fall more rapidly to achieve the same atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gas. Taking the faster route to the same end would double the cost, adding a trillion dollars to the ultimate bill. ''So much depends,'' Dr. Richels said, ''on what we call 'when flexibility.' ''If the issues of where and when emissions should be curbed give policy wonks reason to pause, they pale in importance beside the core question: How much is climate stabilization really worth? Sharp, rapid increases in temperature might transform the biosphere in catastrophic ways, conceivably threatening human survival. But the pace and amount of warming that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change now views as most likely -- an average increase of about four degrees Fahrenheit by 2060, with an increase in rainfall of 7 percent and a one-foot rise in sea level -- suggest a different story. According to the most plausible computer simulations, the economic impact on the temperate zones would be relatively small; increases in agricultural productivity could  more than offset the added costs from storm damage and coastal flooding. Canada and Russia could be big winners, as their growing seasons lengthen and heating bills fall. Even the United States might come out ahead: Robert Mendelsohn, an economist at Yale, estimates that output would increase by $37 billion. The picture is far more dire for the poor, predominantly agricultural tropics, vulnerable to flooding, drought and epidemics. But in a world of limited resources, and limited generosity, Thomas Schelling, an economist at the University of Maryland's School of Public Policy, argues that it would make more sense to divert the sums needed to curb global warming into investments that mitigate poverty in the developing world.''They have more immediate environmental problems -- sanitation, congestion, disease -- that demand prior attention,'' he said. ''Their best defense against climate is their own development.''Many economists who are sanguine about the likely consequences of unchecked temperature increases would still recommend  buying some insurance against less likely catastrophe scenarios -- for example, the possibility that the melting of polar ice could liberate trapped methane and lead to runaway warming. But they insist that it would be irrational to throw big sums at risks this remote. Dr. Nordhaus, the Yale economist, said, ''I've seen nothing that justified increasing the wholesale price of energy by more than 10 percent,'' roughly a nickel a gallon at the gasoline pump. In light of both President Clinton's reluctance to do much without the participation of the developing world and the resistance of Congress to any increases in energy prices, the hurdles to any consensus on swift action appear formidable. That will please analysts who see nothing good coming from on-again, off-again hysteria over climate warming. But it worries Dr. Nordhaus, who wonders how we will ever learn to walk without a few baby steps.''Let's do something modest,'' Dr. Nordhaus urged, ''but let's really do it.''

Here is a brief list of terms that play an important role in the climate change debate:AEROSOLS -- Particles in the atmosphere. They cool the earth by reflecting sunlight back into space, but disappear far faster than greenhouse gases. ANTHROPOGENIC CLIMATE CHANGE -- Changes in the world's climate system that are a result of human actions. BERLIN MANDATE -- The decision by a 1995 United Nations climate conference in Berlin to seek commitments beyond the 1992 Rio agreement, under which developed nations volunteered to limit greenhouse emissions. Precursor to the Kyoto talks. BOTTOM-UP -- An economic analysis that calculates the costs and benefits of change by identifying specific measures and adding up their consequences. CAP AND TRADE -- The heart of the Clinton Administration plan. In 2008, a limit would be placed on carbon emissions for the next five years, and businesses would be issued permits for their share. The permits would be tradable, and companies that make reductions before then would earn credits. CARBON BUDGET -- The amount of carbon released into the atmosphere by net sources, whether natural factors, like dying plants, or human activities, like burning fossil fuel, minus the amount of carbon absorbed by the ocean, growing green plants and other carbon ''sinks.''FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE -- The pact signed by 166 nations in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 to work to limit harmful human interference with the climate. GREENHOUSE GAS -- The tiny fraction of the atmosphere that traps heat. The main greenhouse gases given off by human activity are carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide. Others are hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexachloride. Water vapor also acts as a greenhouse gas. HUMAN SIGNAL -- Evidence of anthropogenic change, as opposed to natural variability. In 1995, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concluded that ''the balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible human influence on global climate.''INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE -- The assemblage of scientists, economists and other experts created by the United Nations to advise member nations in climate negotiations. MODELING -- The use of complex computer calculations to simulate the even more complicated interworkings of the earth's climate system. NATURAL VARIABILITY -- The range of events normally found within a climate system. Refers to natural swings and extremes as well as to day-to-day and year-to-year differences. TOP-DOWN -- An economic analysis that measures the costs and benefits of change by establishing a model of an overall economy and then calculating the system-wide consequences of a change in circumstances. GLOBAL WARMING

WHEN President Clinton's negotiators sit down in Japan on Dec. 1 with their international counterparts to hammer out a treaty to fight global warming, a skeptical and suspicious Congress will be watching closely over their shoulders. A growing body of scientific evidence supports the idea that emissions of heat-trapping gases are disrupting normal weather patterns. Opinion polls show that the theory is gaining public credibility. But Congress is wary. Coping with climate change is shaping up as another thorny intergenerational issue, like overhauling Social Security or Medicare, that forces lawmakers to make painful political choices now that will probably not yield tangible benefits for years or even decades. At a spirited hearing earlier this month, House members groped with how to deal with the problem. They bombarded Timothy E. Wirth, an Undersecretary of State who has been the Administration's lead negotiator on global warming, with detailed questions that he could not answer about a treaty's economic consequences. In exasperation, Representative Dan Schaefer, a Colorado Republican who heads the House Commerce energy and power subcommittee, warned Mr. Wirth, ''If you do it dumb, it could cost a lot of money.''The politics of global warming on Capitol Hill is still very much unformed. Only a handful of lawmakers have studied the complicated issue in depth. But that has not stopped many others from staking out positions consistent with those of their traditional allies in labor, business or the environmental movement. Even after President Clinton's vow last month that the United States would not sign any climate treaty that hurt the American economy or failed to win commitments from developing nations to reduce their carbon dioxide emissions, Congress is still dubious. CONGRESS plays a pivotal role in the issue. Any treaty will require approval from two-thirds of the Senate. The House has no formal role in ratifying treaties, but every step needed to carry out an accord, from policy changes to spending on programs, would have to go through that chamber. The lawmakers' underlying fear is that the United States will end up shouldering an unfair share of the emissions reductions. That, they say,  would lead to some kind of energy tax to curb consumption, which would chill the economy, which would cost jobs. Legislators also express concern that binding limits on emissions might be deferred for large developing countries like China and Mexico, projected as the fastest-growing polluters of the future. Republicans are already promising to make tax cuts a major issue in the 1998 Congressional elections, so they say any accord that even hints at a tax increase will be dead on arrival.''Protecting our environment is an honorable goal,'' Representative Bill Paxon, a fast-rising Republican star from New York, said earlier this fall.  ''But we must ask ourselves an equally important question: 'Can we afford to destroy our children's economic future in the process?' ''Of course, unyielding opposition to action would be a tricky proposition for even the most free-market Republicans. President Clinton and the Democrats have used environmental issues -- and the perceived disdain Republicans have for them -- as an effective political cudgel in the past two years. But in the current political climate, economic concerns trump most environmental worries. The science of global warming is still a contentious issue among lawmakers. A solid core of members of Congress -- most of them Republicans, but some Democrats -- insist that the proposed emissions changes are based on inconclusive evidence. That position is supported by the major foes of a climate treaty: the oil, coal and automobile industries and major electric utilities.''The science doesn't fit into neat little boxes,'' said Senator Chuck Hagel, a Nebraska Republican who is leading a Senate observer group to the final negotiations in Kyoto, Japan. ''Many climatologists will tell you this is nonsense. We just don't know enough about it.''But other lawmakers are leery of the Administration's plan to reduce emissions to 1990 levels by 2012 even though they agree that there is an impending crisis. Senator Robert C. Byrd, a West Virginia Democrat who is a powerful defender of the nation's coal industry, said, ''The problem is global and can only be solved on a global basis.''Democrats and Republicans are divided within their own ranks. Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, and Representative John D. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat who staunchly defends Detroit's automobile industry, criticize the Administration for going too far. An avid environmentalist, Representative Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California, says President Clinton must make a stronger case for a global agreement. ''There is no consensus on the Hill, and there won't be until the President explains the issue better to the American people,'' Mr. Waxman said. CONGRESS has already influenced the Administration's negotiating position. On a vote of 95 to 0 in July, the Senate passed a resolution urging the Administration not to pursue a treaty unless the agreement requires developing nations to control their emissions. This nonbinding resolution forced the Administration to harden its stance toward developing countries.  The measure also urged Mr. Clinton to avoid any treaty that would cause ''serious harm'' to the American economy, a provision that helped move the Administration away from considering direct energy taxes and toward a series of tax credits and research subsidies to encourage energy conservation.''Our challenge,'' said Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, ''is to shape an agreement which sets tough, realistic global-emission reduction goals while harnessing market forces to lower costs, foster technological development and insure economic growth.''Treaties are complex documents that, even after they are signed, take years of preparation before they can be ratified. ''Assuming a fully acceptable treaty is reached in Kyoto,'' said Todd Stern, a senior adviser to Mr. Clinton on climate change, ''you could be well into 1999 by the time you're talking about ratification.''GLOBAL WARMING

IN its 4.5 billion years of existence, the earth has withstood both deep cold that nearly turned the entire planet into a ball of ice and blazing heat that opened the Arctic to alligators and other warm-weather creatures. Compared with that, and even with far less extreme climatic swings in the 10,000 years since the end of the last ice age, today's climate -- for all its sometimes sharp variations -- is remarkably stable. Now, for the first time, humans are altering the atmosphere in ways that mainstream scientists believe are threatening to shatter that relative calm and set off a new round of climatic disruptions and extremes. Starting today, representatives of some 150 countries will meet in Kyoto, Japan, to take what they hope will be the first step in a decades-long effort to cope with the prospect of global climate change. Rarely, if ever, has humanity made an attempt like this one: to exercise deliberate, collective foresight on a risk whose full impact is unclear and will not be felt for decades. And rarely has any question on the global bargaining table been so difficult. The negotiators' task is to agree on measures that would begin to reduce emissions of waste industrial gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. Chief among these ''greenhouse'' gases is carbon dioxide, which is spewed into the air every day around the globe by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas in power plants, factories and motor vehicles. The world runs on these fuels, and any action to control their use would reverberate in every corner of the global economy. This attempt to manipulate the world's energy system has set off a complex clash of economic and political interests. Among other things, it pits rich countries against poor ones, rich countries against one another and the nations and industries that produce fossil fuels (as well as some industries that use them heavily)  against much of the rest of the world. Even as the great majority of players say they accept the need for common action, each is making its own calculation of cost and benefit, advantage and disadvantage. The panel of scientists from  around the world who advise the negotiators under United Nations auspices has said that if no action is taken, the average surface temperature of the globe will rise by two to six degrees Fahrenheit by the end of the next century, and more after that. That might not sound like much, and it is a far cry from the deepest cold and hottest heat of the remote past. But it is not trivial; the difference between the average temperature now and that at the depths of the last ice age, some 20,000 years ago, is only five to nine degrees. IT would be more warming, coming more rapidly, than the planet has experienced in the last 10,000 years, the period in which human civilization arose. It could profoundly affect the earth's climate. The seas would rise, according to the panel of scientists, inundating many coastal areas and swamping small island nations. The world as a whole would become rainier, with most of the increase coming in the big downpours that cause floods. At the same time, drought-prone areas would get more droughts. Climatic zones would shift away from the poles, the scientists predict.  Since the warming would be unusually rapid, many natural ecosystems might be unable to adjust, and whole forest types could disappear. Growing seasons are already lengthening in northern latitudes, and temperate-zone agriculture might benefit in the long run. But in dry areas, like much of Africa, warming could bring agricultural and economic ruin. Tropical diseases like malaria and dengue fever could spread. And while temperate-zone winters would be milder, summer heat waves would be more intense and deadly. The list goes on. Such forecasts, of course, are rife with uncertainty. But many scientists believe that much of the impact is unavoidable. The implication is that preventive action to head off the risk, however uncertain, should have been taken years ago. But who knew? It has been only two decades since 20th-century scientists, with their computer models, first began to make numerical forecasts of climate change, only one decade since the issue first burst into the public consciousness and only five years since the nations of the world gathered at Rio de Janeiro and signed a treaty aimed at preventing dangerous climatic change. For much of the last two decades, scientists have cited a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations -- to 560 parts per million from 280 parts per million before the Industrial Revolution began in the late 18th century -- as a threshold of concern. If that threshold should be reached, they say, the air at the earth's surface would warm by anywhere from a relatively moderate  three degrees to eight degrees, a level at which the impact of some of the predicted climatic changes could assume catastrophic proportions. Now many are saying that it may not be possible to prevent a doubling late in the next century. The world's economic and political systems cannot turn on a dime, they say, and they argue that the real task now is to prevent concentrations from growing beyond a doubling, to possibly even tripling or quadrupling. Those concentrations, they say, would bring certain climatic catastrophe. In the meantime, the world may have to learn to adapt. Not everyone is so pessimistic. Environmentalists' goal is to stabilize carbon dioxide concentrations at about one and a half times the preindustrial level, then to begin to gradually reduce them. Although that might still cause some disruption, they believe, it would head off the most damaging effects. There remain contrarians who say  the problem has been overblown and may not exist. Given the uncertainty that permeates climate science, even many experts who are not skeptics argue for modest action until the extent of the problem is clearer. As has been the case all along under the 1992 Rio treaty that governs the Kyoto talks, the industrialized countries are expected to take the lead in setting specific targets for reducing emissions. The rationale, based largely on considerations of equity, is that they got rich by burning fossil fuels and are responsible for most of the problem. But developing countries are also to undertake specific commitments at some point because their emissions will probably surpass those of the rich nations in two decades or so. When that will happen, and how, will be a big issue in Kyoto, possibly a deal-breaker. If the talks collapsed, the process would not be over because discussions would certainly resume at some point. But proponents of action argue that valuable time  would be lost. AT Rio five years ago, the rich nations adopted the voluntary goal of stabilizing emissions at 1990 levels by 2000. But many nations, including the United States, will miss that target. Proposals now on the table for the meeting in Japan call for legally binding reductions.  They range from reducing the rich countries' emissions to 1990 levels by around 2010 (proposed by the United States) to cutting them to 35 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 (proposed by the developing countries). None of the proposals would reduce emissions enough to keep overall atmospheric concentrations from rising. But, given the political reality,  those proposals probably define the range of what can be achieved just now. Some environmentalists believe that it is possible to emerge from the talks with cuts sufficient to preserve the option of eventually stabilizing concentrations at one and a half times preindustrial levels. They also say it is possible in Kyoto to send a signal to industry that business as usual must change. Some experts who argue caution, on economic grounds, believe likewise. But other interested parties, including oil-producing countries and many American manufacturers, argue that any action now risks unacceptable short-term economic damage. Environmentalists counter that by insisting that in the long run, cutting fossil fuels would make the economy more efficient. At most, Kyoto will be a beginning, not an ending. GLOBAL WARMING

SCIENTISTS and other experts who have spent years trying to get people concerned about the prospect of global warming have always faced a central problem: temperatures change all the time. From summer to winter, Minneapolis goes from 90-degree heat waves to 10-below deep freezes. At the end of a spell of Indian summer, Manhattan can go from 65 degrees to 25 in a few hours. So why should anyone get excited about a global rise of a few degrees in a few decades? But the debate before negotiators in Kyoto, Japan, is about climate, not weather. It is about long-term shifts in patterns of weather, not seasonal or day-to-day shifts from rain to sun, cold to heat. Understanding the difference between weather and climate is the first step in understanding why many scientists are predicting that changes that seem trivial in terms of any single day -- a change, say, of five degrees Fahrenheit -- could have large impacts on many facets of life when those changes are on a global scale. Global warming would not change the range of weather experienced day to day, but it would increase the odds of having weather that is considered troublesome by 20th-century standards: summer droughts, winter deluges, hurricanes and the like. At the heart of the theory that has dozens of nations poised to act to lessen the threat is the long-established idea that earth's atmosphere behaves like the roof of a greenhouse. The atmosphere was first compared to a ''glass vessel'' in 1827 by the French mathematician Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier. He recognized that the air circulating around the planet lets in sunlight -- as a greenhouse's glass roof does -- but prevents some of the resulting warmth from leaving. If the air had no heat-trapping effect, the heat from the sun would quickly radiate back into space, leaving the planet with a surface temperature of nearly zero degrees Fahrenheit. In the 1850's, a British physicist, John Tyndall, took things further and tried to measure the heat-trapping properties of various components of the atmosphere. Surprisingly, the two most abundant gases -- nitrogen and oxygen -- turned out to have no heat-trapping ability. Ninety-nine percent of the atmosphere has no insulating properties at all. It is all up to a few trace gases -- mainly water vapor and carbon dioxide -- to keep the planet cozy. If the air did not contain carbon dioxide, the planet would be some 20 degrees cooler. Without water vapor, it would be a deep-frozen ball of ice. By the 1890's, scientists had figured out that the great blossoming of combustion in the Industrial Revolution had the potential to change the atmosphere's load of carbon dioxide. The idea was summarized succinctly in the April 1896 issue of The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine by a Swedish chemist, Svante Arrhenius, who wrote, ''We are evaporating our coal mines into the air.''PRECISE monitoring of carbon dioxide concentrations since the 1950's has shown a relentless upward trend. Some of the carbon dioxide has gone into the ocean, and some has been absorbed by growing trees, but the amount in the air has continued to rise. There has been a simultaneous rise in the planet's average temperature, although at a far slower -- and more uneven -- pace. Other factors appear to have acted like a buffer, including a rise in the amount of sooty particles in the air; they act something like a parasol, reflecting some of the sun's energy back into space before it can warm things up. Nonetheless, many scientists, using computer models, say that they can account for buffering mechanisms and still see problems ahead, particularly if significant cuts are not made in the rates at which petroleum and coal are burned. Indeed, many of their calculations indicate that the necessary cuts in emissions of carbon dioxide would actually have to be far greater than even the most ambitious targets on the negotiating table in Kyoto. There has also been a rise in the atmosphere's burden of methane and nitrous oxide from sources related to human activities, and these gases also trap heat. Even though the greenhouse gases exist in only trace amounts -- they are measured in parts per million and, in some cases, parts per trillion -- they exert a powerful influence on the temperature of the planet. So a tiny change in their concentrations can cause a big change in the way the atmosphere behaves. Dr. John W. Firor, an atmospheric scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, likes to compare the situation to that of a corporation that is vulnerable to a takeover. A change of a couple of shareholders' votes can mean the difference between survival and getting swallowed up. It is a ''highly leveraged situation,'' he said, using the parlance of Wall Street. He and many other scientists say the risks of meddling significantly with the insulating atmospheric greenhouse are simply too great to continue on the current course, adding more than seven billion tons of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases to the air each year. But they acknowledge that many of the feedback loops and connections between the components of Earth's atmosphere, oceans, ice caps and, ultimately, climate are complex and remain poorly understood. The computer models with which scientists are projecting the range of future consequences from this rise are still a relatively crude representation of the real world of clouds, ocean currents, jet streams and other complexities. Some consistent critics of the projections say the models are rife with weaknesses -- particularly in predicting how warming could affect cloud cover and in how solar energy moves from the surface to the highest levels of the atmosphere and then out into space. An increase in cloudiness could act like panels on a greenhouse roof, countering the heat-trapping effect of the greenhouse gases by reflecting the sun and leading to cooling. Dr. Richard S. Lindzen, a professor of meteorology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a consistent skeptic on the perils of climate change, said the negotiations in Kyoto were mostly focused on bolstering the resumes of diplomats. Even if the models are correct -- which Dr. Lindzen doubts -- the cuts in greenhouse gases on the table are so small that they will hardly matter, he said.''Climate always changes, whether man does anything about it or not,'' Dr. Lindzen said. ''Now any changes will be attributed to policy, not nature.''BUT many of his colleagues disagree, saying that the models have held true despite continuing efforts to weed out spurious results. And many of them say it is essential to act now. Dr. Stephen H. Schneider, a Stanford University biology professor, said that in the 20th century, there had already been a distinct warming trend and a change in precipitation patterns that was hard to ascribe to anything other than the manmade increase in greenhouse gases.''Is this nature being perverse or is it us?'' Dr. Schneider said. ''The only way to prove it for sure is hang around 10, 20 or 30 more years, when the evidence would be overwhelming. But in the meantime, we're conducting a global experiment. And we're all in the test tube.''GLOBAL WARMING

TO GET a sense of where President Clinton ended up after a year-long White House struggle to shape his global warming plan, consider who quit after it was announced. It was Timothy E. Wirth, the Undersecretary of State for global environmental affairs, one of the greenest of the President's advisers and nominally the top official directly in charge of negotiations toward a new climate treaty. Mr. Wirth advocated an aggressive plan for significant cutbacks in the nation's emissions of greenhouse gases -- one that could have had significant costs for the economy. Bit by bit, that plan was scaled back as Mr. Clinton listened, and listened again, to the warnings of senior economic advisers like Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers and the chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, Janet L. Yellen. Mr. Wirth's decision -- to leave his post after the Kyoto talks to head a foundation created by the billionaire Ted Turner to support the United Nations -- followed a long, meandering and occasionally intense debate inside the White House that reflected many of the conflicts that bedevil climate change policy. The conflicts went beyond the traditional clash of green eyeshades and green armbands, to encompass opposing views on technology's potential and on ways of making predictions about unpredictable systems. The debate also pitted the old Bill Clinton, whose instinct would have been to side with Mr. Wirth's call for sweeping government action, against a new Bill Clinton, chastened by his health-care failure and acutely aware of the domestic impact of foreign policy. And it was shadowed by two futures: for Mr. Clinton, by a desire to shape his legacy, and for Vice President Al Gore, by the need to balance his strong environmental views against the coalition-building that leads up to a presidential run. FIVE years ago, President George Bush joined other leaders of developed nations in pledging at the Rio environmental summit to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000. Two years ago, when it was already clear that the U.S. and some other countries would miss that voluntary target, Mr. Clinton agreed to join an effort to come up with a binding treaty for reductions at Kyoto. In the struggle that followed, President Clinton's economic advisers stopped him from promising deep, quick cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases, but they argue that they did not win this debate; they say they merely acted as a counterweight to Mr. Wirth, Katie McGinty, the White House environmental adviser, and environmental groups. The President, his economic team notes, did not agree to delay cutbacks in emissions for as long as the economists had initially suggested.''The spin is that we won,'' one senior economic adviser to Mr. Clinton said recently. ''The reality was a little more muddled.  We agreed there needed to be goals, even aggressive goals. But there also needed to be escape hatches, in case the economic effects turned out to be a lot more damaging than we thought.''MR. CLINTON pledged that the United States would cut emissions to 1990 levels in the next 10 to 15 years. The turnabout in emissions will be encouraged at first with tax incentives and research subsidies for conservation and clean energy production. In later years, a cap will be placed on greenhouse emissions, coupled with a system to give credits for emissions reductions that companies can save and sell. It is a system in which the Government will set a mandatory goal but leave the mechanism to the market instead of turning to a Government fiat. If the Administration's approach delivers the promised reductions, emissions between 2008 and 2012 will be about a third lower than current trends would predict. But nobody knows how much that will cost. ''There is no credible, widely accepted economic analysis that currently exists in the United States, or in most other countries, that can answer very basic cost and benefit questions,'' said Eileen B. Claussen, a former senior aide to Mr. Wirth who had played an instrumental role in the talks but left the Administration a few months ago. It wasn't for lack of trying. The Administration struggled for two years to come up with a credible analysis of the economic effects of moving away from fossil fuels, but the uncertainties -- over things like what the United States economy will look like a decade from now, what technological advances in emissions controls will be made and how willing consumers and manufacturers will be to respond to economic incentives -- proved overwhelming. Ms. Yellen essentially declared the effort to come up with reliable numbers a failure last summer. That opened the door to something of a policy-making free-for-all that lasted well into the fall and has left many members of Congress wary, Ms. Claussen said. There was never any serious debate inside the Administration about the science of the issue; the White House has decided that the climate problem is real and serious. After all, the leading environmentalist of them all is Mr. Gore, and he long ago won over President Clinton on the need to do something about the threat of climate change. But as one of Mr. Clinton's top aides noted during the debate: ''Al has discovered it's a lot easier to write a book about the subject than to grapple with the economic costs. But he's getting the hang of it.''In the end, Mr. Gore was highly receptive to the economic arguments, especially when the chorus of warnings included American business groups, whose support he will need when running for President. The real debate within the Administration pitted the pure economists against the technologists, the people who deal with the gross domestic product against those who specialize in British thermal units. The economists were deeply worried that any policy intended to drive down the use of fossil fuels -- especially a policy like the one the Administration favors, to put a cap on emissions of carbon dioxide and to let a market in emission permits dictate the price of fossil fuels -- would, in effect, amount to a system of energy rationing and energy taxes. In their rear-view mirrors, these advisers saw the economic disruptions of the oil shocks of the 1970's. But the technologists argued that the new policy would stimulate the appearance and rapid adoption of exciting new technologies that would make it possible to conserve energy and to produce more of it without fossil fuels. In their rear-view mirrors, they saw the efficiency gains and higher productivity that resulted from putting the nation on an energy diet in the 1970's and the 1980's. Both groups have economic models that prove their arguments. But no model is particularly well suited to predict what will happen to energy prices under the Clinton Administration's plan. That is because the plan calls for using inherently unpredictable free markets, rather than rigid regulations, to control emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The Administration wants to put a fixed overall cap on the total emissions of greenhouse gases by industries. Then it would issue individual companies permits that would allow them to release a certain amount of the gases. Limiting the supply of something increasingly in demand generally has the effect of driving up its price. But the Administration hopes that the permits, which would be traded on a free market, will limit the price pressures on energy and encourage innovation instead. For instance, a company that found a cheap way to control carbon dioxide emissions could sell its extra permits to a company with high control costs. Both companies would benefit economically from the transaction, and the market in permits would stimulate the invention and adoption of the cheapest possible control technologies. The Administration hopes to extend the permit system worldwide, allowing poorer countries with low emissions to raise money by selling part of their right to emit greenhouse gases to developed countries that have plenty of cash but have bumped into their pollution limits. Selling this at Kyoto, where developing nations are demanding deeper, faster cuts, is shaping up as a daunting task. But Mr. Clinton has tried to build his second term on proposals to marry government goals and market mechanisms, and has always prided himself on his deal-making abilities. This time, it may be the deal of the next century. GLOBAL WARMING

JUST as India and the West had begun to put past frictions behind them, global warming has come along to reignite the sort of passions that were commonplace during the cold war, when India's perspectives were those of an ally of the Soviet Union and a founder of what was known as the non-aligned movement, with its fixation on the evils done to developing nations by the rapacious West. In the months leading up to the United Nations conference on climate change in Kyoto, Japan, Indian environmentalists and politicians have joined in a chorus of angry denunciations of proposals that Western nations, particularly the United States, have advanced for limiting emissions of so-called greenhouse gases. Phrases like ''environmental colonialism'' and the ''Western rape and pillage of the world's resources'' have  poured forth, along with predictions that Kyoto could forge a new and even deeper split between the richer and poorer nations of the earth. At one level, the Indian anger seems curiously misplaced, considering the acknowledged deterioration of India's own environment and the blame that many of these same environmentalists and politicians place on governmental failures at home. If India's environment is visibly among the most polluted anywhere, particularly in terms of air quality in the major cities, it is a problem closely linked to a burgeoning population, now nearly 980 million, that has almost tripled in the 50 years since independence and continues to grow by 20 million every year with scant sign of any government effort to promote birth control. As anybody struggling with the choking levels of air pollution in New Delhi, Bombay or Calcutta can attest, India is fighting a losing battle with urban traffic levels that double every five years, Dickensian factories that generally ignore environmental controls and the reliance in heavy industry on heavily sulfurous coal. The situation in New Delhi, the capital, has become so threatening that some Western embassies have begun discouraging the assignment to India of any diplomat or family member with respiratory problems, especially small children. Indian experts have even warned that rising sea levels could cost the country large portions of its 3,000-mile coastline within the next 50 years. But when it comes to international efforts to deal with global warming, many of those who will have a decisive voice in India's policies approach the issue as though environmental degradation is mainly the fault of, and a problem for, the industrialized nations of the West. If there were any doubt of the strength of feeling on the matter, it was dispelled when Prime Minister Inder Kumar Gujral attended the meeting in Edinburgh in October of the nations of the Commonwealth and agreed to a closing communique that said, seemingly innocuously, that all countries attending the Kyoto meeting ''will need to play their part in policies that would result in significant reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.''Mr. Gujral was met with a barrage of criticism at home to the effect that he had sold out India and other developing nations with large greenhouse gas emissions, China and Brazil prominent among them. Those nations have said that it is up to the United States and other Western nations to cut back on emissions without imposing similar requirements on poorer countries that are struggling to catch up economically with the West. This position has been squarely rejected by President Clinton, who announced in September that the United States ''will not assume binding obligations unless key developing nations meaningfully participate in the effort.''Indians marshal numerous arguments against their country's accepting any mandatory emissions controls. Many are rooted in political arguments that depict the ''one-worldism'' of Western environmentalists as a mask for efforts to shackle the economic development of poorer nations just as they show signs of beginning to claim a greater share of the world's wealth. Even among Indian environmentalists who accept the need for limits, there is a common political premise: that whatever environmental regime emerges from Kyoto should be based on ''per capita entitlements'' to pollute the atmosphere, an approach that would ultimately allow India and China, with nearly two-fifths of the world's population, to pump more carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere than the United States, Canada and all the nations of the European Union combined. JOHN F. BURNS

THE air still tastes gritty, and sometimes it has a slight odor. But air pollution here, as elsewhere in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, has declined since the end of Communist rule. What makes the Poles proud, however, is that they have accomplished this not just in Communism's aftermath, when industrial output plunged. When production started to pick up in 1992, after a drop in the previous four years, emissions stayed down. The reduction has been managed, Polish experts say, in large part due to investments in desulfurization installations at power plants and a gradual phasing out of small emission sources, like coal-burning stoves and boilers. ''Particularly in the coal mining region of Silesia, emissions went down with the use of better filters and better use of energy,'' said Wojtek Ponikiewski, an environmental expert in Poland's Ministry of Foreign Affairs. And even as the number of cars is growing rapidly in Poland, many of these new cars -- though not enough, environmental critics say -- are fitted with catalytic converters. All over Eastern Europe, the quality of the environment has improved since 1989. Dust emissions fell from 1.5 million tons in 1989 to 529,000 tons in 1994; gas emissions dropped from 5.2 million tons to 2.9 million tons; sulfur dioxide emissions declined from 2.8 million tons to 1.7 million tons. But the progress is not enough. Poland was severely criticized in a recent report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a group of industrialized nations. ''Low air quality still poses a threat to human life in Poland's highly industrialized areas,'' the group's report said. Poland, anxious to join the European Union, is already under pressure from Western Europe to take drastic steps to cut emissions to meet the tougher standards set by its economically more mature neighbors. But there was no possibility, Mr. Ponikiewski said, that Poland could agree to a  suggestion by the European Union that the world's nations commit to a 15 percent reduction of greenhouse gases, compared with 1990 emission levels, by 2010. Even so, the Kyoto conference will add extra pressure. One of the most obvious methods to get emissions reductions is to introduce new taxes on fuel. ''No government wants to do that,'' Mr. Ponikiewski said. Poland's environmental groups say there is a way to make progress: cutting back on a plan for a $8 billion superhighway building program and replacing it with mass transit. But, given Poland's new love affair with the car, that is unlikely. JANE PERLEZ

FOR four years after playing host to the 1992 Earth Summit here, Brazil claimed that the destruction of the Amazon rain forest -- home to the world's richest trove of bacterial, plant, animal and insect species -- was on the decline. But when it finally released data last year on the period through 1994, the figures showed precisely the opposite, a 34 percent increase in deforestation, to about 15,000 square kilometers a year from 11,000 square kilometers, destroyed through colonization by ranchers and farmers and illegal logging. Once again this year, official word on the extent of rain forest destruction, this time for data since 1994, is running late, with the Government pledging to release them the day before the Kyoto conference begins. But the thick clouds of black smoke that have shut schools and airports near the forests' edges have left little doubt among Brazilians about the trend. Weather satellites show the number of fires increased 11 percent in the June to October burning season. While most fires are not located in primary rain forest, some environmentalists believe that the increased burning corresponds to an increase in deforestation and makes the rain forests more vulnerable to accidental fires. Brazilian officials say they are making progress. They are moving to crack down on deforestation by revoking 63 percent of logging licenses, many of which were being used to log in excess of legal limits, and are overhauling government policies that traditionally rewarded ranching or planting in the rain forest as an improvement on the land. But environmentalists fear that the Amazon may face new threats ahead. A state-of-the-art radar surveillance project to reveal the Amazon's hidden resources is under way, as well as major road projects to make the Amazon more accessible for industry. Before the Kyoto meeting, Brazilian officials said their country's fires and rain forest destruction paled next to the environmental damage caused by United States industry, which puts out 22 percent of the world's fossil fuel emissions. Brazil says it puts out less than 3 percent of the fossil fuel emissions. Brazilian officials also criticize the G-7, the seven richest industrial nations, for declining to spend $1.5 billion for environmental protection programs that Brazil requested in 1990. But environmentalists argue that the problem is not one of money, but of political will. Of the $260 million that was pledged, Brazil has spent only some 30 percent. DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SCIENTISTS and other experts who have spent years trying to get people concerned about the prospect of global warming have always faced a central problem: temperatures change all the time. From summer to winter, Minneapolis goes from 90-degree heat waves to 10-below deep freezes. At the end of a spell of Indian summer, Manhattan can go from 65 degrees to 25 in a few hours. So why should anyone get excited about a global rise of a few degrees in a few decades? But the debate before negotiators in Kyoto, Japan, is about climate, not weather. It is about long-term shifts in patterns of weather, not seasonal or day-to-day shifts from rain to sun, cold to heat. Understanding the difference between weather and climate is the first step in understanding why many scientists are predicting that changes that seem trivial in terms of any single day -- a change, say, of five degrees Fahrenheit -- could have large impacts on many facets of life when those changes are on a global scale. Global warming would not change the range of weather experienced day to day, but it would increase the odds of having weather that is considered troublesome by 20th-century standards: summer droughts, winter deluges, hurricanes and the like. At the heart of the theory that has dozens of nations poised to act to lessen the threat is the long-established idea that earth's atmosphere behaves like the roof of a greenhouse. The atmosphere was first compared to a ''glass vessel'' in 1827 by the French mathematician Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier. He recognized that the air circulating around the planet lets in sunlight -- as a greenhouse's glass roof does -- but prevents some of the resulting warmth from leaving. If the air had no heat-trapping effect, the heat from the sun would quickly radiate back into space, leaving the planet with a surface temperature of nearly zero degrees Fahrenheit. In the 1850's, a British physicist, John Tyndall, took things further and tried to measure the heat-trapping properties of various components of the atmosphere. Surprisingly, the two most abundant gases -- nitrogen and oxygen -- turned out to have no heat-trapping ability. Ninety-nine percent of the atmosphere has no insulating properties at all. It is all up to a few trace gases -- mainly water vapor and carbon dioxide -- to keep the planet cozy. If the air did not contain carbon dioxide, the planet would be some 20 degrees cooler. Without water vapor, it would be a deep-frozen ball of ice. By the 1890's, scientists had figured out that the great blossoming of combustion in the Industrial Revolution had the potential to change the atmosphere's load of carbon dioxide. The idea was summarized succinctly in the April 1896 issue of The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine by a Swedish chemist, Svante Arrhenius, who wrote, ''We are evaporating our coal mines into the air.''PRECISE monitoring of carbon dioxide concentrations since the 1950's has shown a relentless upward trend. Some of the carbon dioxide has gone into the ocean, and some has been absorbed by growing trees, but the amount in the air has continued to rise. There has been a simultaneous rise in the planet's average temperature, although at a far slower -- and more uneven -- pace. Other factors appear to have acted like a buffer, including a rise in the amount of sooty particles in the air; they act something like a parasol, reflecting some of the sun's energy back into space before it can warm things up. Nonetheless, many scientists, using computer models, say that they can account for buffering mechanisms and still see problems ahead, particularly if significant cuts are not made in the rates at which petroleum and coal are burned. Indeed, many of their calculations indicate that the necessary cuts in emissions of carbon dioxide would actually have to be far greater than even the most ambitious targets on the negotiating table in Kyoto. There has also been a rise in the atmosphere's burden of methane and nitrous oxide from sources related to human activities, and these gases also trap heat. Even though the greenhouse gases exist in only trace amounts -- they are measured in parts per million and, in some cases, parts per trillion -- they exert a powerful influence on the temperature of the planet. So a tiny change in their concentrations can cause a big change in the way the atmosphere behaves. Dr. John W. Firor, an atmospheric scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, likes to compare the situation to that of a corporation that is vulnerable to a takeover. A change of a couple of shareholders' votes can mean the difference between survival and getting swallowed up. It is a ''highly leveraged situation,'' he said, using the parlance of Wall Street. He and many other scientists say the risks of meddling significantly with the insulating atmospheric greenhouse are simply too great to continue on the current course, adding more than seven billion tons of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases to the air each year. But they acknowledge that many of the feedback loops and connections between the components of Earth's atmosphere, oceans, ice caps and, ultimately, climate are complex and remain poorly understood. The computer models with which scientists are projecting the range of future consequences from this rise are still a relatively crude representation of the real world of clouds, ocean currents, jet streams and other complexities. Some consistent critics of the projections say the models are rife with weaknesses -- particularly in predicting how warming could affect cloud cover and in how solar energy moves from the surface to the highest levels of the atmosphere and then out into space. An increase in cloudiness could act like panels on a greenhouse roof, countering the heat-trapping effect of the greenhouse gases by reflecting the sun and leading to cooling. Dr. Richard S. Lindzen, a professor of meteorology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a consistent skeptic on the perils of climate change, said the negotiations in Kyoto were mostly focused on bolstering the resumes of diplomats. Even if the models are correct -- which Dr. Lindzen doubts -- the cuts in greenhouse gases on the table are so small that they will hardly matter, he said.''Climate always changes, whether man does anything about it or not,'' Dr. Lindzen said. ''Now any changes will be attributed to policy, not nature.''BUT many of his colleagues disagree, saying that the models have held true despite continuing efforts to weed out spurious results. And many of them say it is essential to act now. Dr. Stephen H. Schneider, a Stanford University biology professor, said that in the 20th century, there had already been a distinct warming trend and a change in precipitation patterns that was hard to ascribe to anything other than the manmade increase in greenhouse gases.''Is this nature being perverse or is it us?'' Dr. Schneider said. ''The only way to prove it for sure is hang around 10, 20 or 30 more years, when the evidence would be overwhelming. But in the meantime, we're conducting a global experiment. And we're all in the test tube.''GLOBAL WARMING

IN its 4.5 billion years of existence, the earth has withstood both deep cold that nearly turned the entire planet into a ball of ice and blazing heat that opened the Arctic to alligators and other warm-weather creatures. Compared with that, and even with far less extreme climatic swings in the 10,000 years since the end of the last ice age, today's climate -- for all its sometimes sharp variations -- is remarkably stable. Now, for the first time, humans are altering the atmosphere in ways that mainstream scientists believe are threatening to shatter that relative calm and set off a new round of climatic disruptions and extremes. Starting today, representatives of some 150 countries will meet in Kyoto, Japan, to take what they hope will be the first step in a decades-long effort to cope with the prospect of global climate change. Rarely, if ever, has humanity made an attempt like this one: to exercise deliberate, collective foresight on a risk whose full impact is unclear and will not be felt for decades. And rarely has any question on the global bargaining table been so difficult. The negotiators' task is to agree on measures that would begin to reduce emissions of waste industrial gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. Chief among these ''greenhouse'' gases is carbon dioxide, which is spewed into the air every day around the globe by the burning of coal, oil and natural gas in power plants, factories and motor vehicles. The world runs on these fuels, and any action to control their use would reverberate in every corner of the global economy. This attempt to manipulate the world's energy system has set off a complex clash of economic and political interests. Among other things, it pits rich countries against poor ones, rich countries against one another and the nations and industries that produce fossil fuels (as well as some industries that use them heavily) against much of the rest of the world. Even as the great majority of players say they accept the need for common action, each is making its own calculation of cost and benefit, advantage and disadvantage. The panel of scientists from around the world who advise the negotiators under United Nations auspices has said that if no action is taken, the average surface temperature of the globe will rise by two to six degrees Fahrenheit by the end of the next century, and more after that. That might not sound like much, and it is a far cry from the deepest cold and hottest heat of the remote past. But it is not trivial; the difference between the average temperature now and that at the depths of the last ice age, some 20,000 years ago, is only five to nine degrees. IT would be more warming, coming more rapidly, than the planet has experienced in the last 10,000 years, the period in which human civilization arose. It could profoundly affect the earth's climate. The seas would rise, according to the panel of scientists, inundating many coastal areas and swamping small island nations. The world as a whole would become rainier, with most of the increase coming in the big downpours that cause floods. At the same time, drought-prone areas would get more droughts. Climatic zones would shift away from the poles, the scientists predict. Since the warming would be unusually rapid, many natural ecosystems might be unable to adjust, and whole forest types could disappear. Growing seasons are already lengthening in northern latitudes, and temperate-zone agriculture might benefit in the long run. But in dry areas, like much of Africa, warming could bring agricultural and economic ruin. Tropical diseases like malaria and dengue fever could spread. And while temperate-zone winters would be milder, summer heat waves would be more intense and deadly. The list goes on. Such forecasts, of course, are rife with uncertainty. But many scientists believe that much of the impact is unavoidable. The implication is that preventive action to head off the risk, however uncertain, should have been taken years ago. But who knew? It has been only two decades since 20th-century scientists, with their computer models, first began to make numerical forecasts of climate change, only one decade since the issue first burst into the public consciousness and only five years since the nations of the world gathered at Rio de Janeiro and signed a treaty aimed at preventing dangerous climatic change. For much of the last two decades, scientists have cited a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations -- to 560 parts per million from 280 parts per million before the Industrial Revolution began in the late 18th century -- as a threshold of concern. If that threshold should be reached, they say, the air at the earth's surface would warm by anywhere from a relatively moderate three degrees to eight degrees, a level at which the impact of some of the predicted climatic changes could assume catastrophic proportions. Now many are saying that it may not be possible to prevent a doubling late in the next century. The world's economic and political systems cannot turn on a dime, they say, and they argue that the real task now is to prevent concentrations from growing beyond a doubling, to possibly even tripling or quadrupling. Those concentrations, they say, would bring certain climatic catastrophe. In the meantime, the world may have to learn to adapt. Not everyone is so pessimistic. Environmentalists' goal is to stabilize carbon dioxide concentrations at about one and a half times the preindustrial level, then to begin to gradually reduce them. Although that might still cause some disruption, they believe, it would head off the most damaging effects. There remain contrarians who say the problem has been overblown and may not exist. Given the uncertainty that permeates climate science, even many experts who are not skeptics argue for modest action until the extent of the problem is clearer. As has been the case all along under the 1992 Rio treaty that governs the Kyoto talks, the industrialized countries are expected to take the lead in setting specific targets for reducing emissions. The rationale, based largely on considerations of equity, is that they got rich by burning fossil fuels and are responsible for most of the problem. But developing countries are also to undertake specific commitments at some point because their emissions will probably surpass those of the rich nations in two decades or so. When that will happen, and how, will be a big issue in Kyoto, possibly a deal-breaker. If the talks collapsed, the process would not be over because discussions would certainly resume at some point. But proponents of action argue that valuable time would be lost. AT Rio five years ago, the rich nations adopted the voluntary goal of stabilizing emissions at 1990 levels by 2000. But many nations, including the United States, will miss that target. Proposals now on the table for the meeting in Japan call for legally binding reductions. They range from reducing the rich countries' emissions to 1990 levels by around 2010 (proposed by the United States) to cutting them to 35 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 (proposed by the developing countries). None of the proposals would reduce emissions enough to keep overall atmospheric concentrations from rising. But, given the political reality, those proposals probably define the range of what can be achieved just now. Some environmentalists believe that it is possible to emerge from the talks with cuts sufficient to preserve the option of eventually stabilizing concentrations at one and a half times preindustrial levels. They also say it is possible in Kyoto to send a signal to industry that business as usual must change. Some experts who argue caution, on economic grounds, believe likewise. But other interested parties, including oil-producing countries and many American manufacturers, argue that any action now risks unacceptable short-term economic damage. Environmentalists counter that by insisting that in the long run, cutting fossil fuels would make the economy more efficient. At most, Kyoto will be a beginning, not an ending. GLOBAL WARMING

TO GET a sense of where President Clinton ended up after a year-long White House struggle to shape his global warming plan, consider who quit after it was announced. It was Timothy E. Wirth, the Undersecretary of State for global environmental affairs, one of the greenest of the President's advisers and nominally the top official directly in charge of negotiations toward a new climate treaty. Mr. Wirth advocated an aggressive plan for significant cutbacks in the nation's emissions of greenhouse gases -- one that could have had significant costs for the economy. Bit by bit, that plan was scaled back as Mr. Clinton listened, and listened again, to the warnings of senior economic advisers like Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers and the chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, Janet L. Yellen. Mr. Wirth's decision -- to leave his post after the Kyoto talks to head a foundation created by the billionaire Ted Turner to support the United Nations -- followed a long, meandering and occasionally intense debate inside the White House that reflected many of the conflicts that bedevil climate change policy. The conflicts went beyond the traditional clash of green eyeshades and green armbands, to encompass opposing views on technology's potential and on ways of making predictions about unpredictable systems. The debate also pitted the old Bill Clinton, whose instinct would have been to side with Mr. Wirth's call for sweeping government action, against a new Bill Clinton, chastened by his health-care failure and acutely aware of the domestic impact of foreign policy. And it was shadowed by two futures: for Mr. Clinton, by a desire to shape his legacy, and for Vice President Al Gore, by the need to balance his strong environmental views against the coalition-building that leads up to a presidential run. FIVE years ago, President George Bush joined other leaders of developed nations in pledging at the Rio environmental summit to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000. Two years ago, when it was already clear that the U.S. and some other countries would miss that voluntary target, Mr. Clinton agreed to join an effort to come up with a binding treaty for reductions at Kyoto. In the struggle that followed, President Clinton's economic advisers stopped him from promising deep, quick cuts in emissions of greenhouse gases, but they argue that they did not win this debate; they say they merely acted as a counterweight to Mr. Wirth, Katie McGinty, the White House environmental adviser, and environmental groups. The President, his economic team notes, did not agree to delay cutbacks in emissions for as long as the economists had initially suggested.''The spin is that we won,'' one senior economic adviser to Mr. Clinton said recently. ''The reality was a little more muddled. We agreed there needed to be goals, even aggressive goals. But there also needed to be escape hatches, in case the economic effects turned out to be a lot more damaging than we thought.''MR. CLINTON pledged that the United States would cut emissions to 1990 levels in the next 10 to 15 years. The turnabout in emissions will be encouraged at first with tax incentives and research subsidies for conservation and clean energy production. In later years, a cap will be placed on greenhouse emissions, coupled with a system to give credits for emissions reductions that companies can save and sell. It is a system in which the Government will set a mandatory goal but leave the mechanism to the market instead of turning to a Government fiat. If the Administration's approach delivers the promised reductions, emissions between 2008 and 2012 will be about a third lower than current trends would predict. But nobody knows how much that will cost. ''There is no credible, widely accepted economic analysis that currently exists in the United States, or in most other countries, that can answer very basic cost and benefit questions,'' said Eileen B. Claussen, a former senior aide to Mr. Wirth who had played an instrumental role in the talks but left the Administration a few months ago. It wasn't for lack of trying. The Administration struggled for two years to come up with a credible analysis of the economic effects of moving away from fossil fuels, but the uncertainties -- over things like what the United States economy will look like a decade from now, what technological advances in emissions controls will be made and how willing consumers and manufacturers will be to respond to economic incentives -- proved overwhelming. Ms. Yellen essentially declared the effort to come up with reliable numbers a failure last summer. That opened the door to something of a policy-making free-for-all that lasted well into the fall and has left many members of Congress wary, Ms. Claussen said. There was never any serious debate inside the Administration about the science of the issue; the White House has decided that the climate problem is real and serious. After all, the leading environmentalist of them all is Mr. Gore, and he long ago won over President Clinton on the need to do something about the threat of climate change. But as one of Mr. Clinton's top aides noted during the debate: ''Al has discovered it's a lot easier to write a book about the subject than to grapple with the economic costs. But he's getting the hang of it.''In the end, Mr. Gore was highly receptive to the economic arguments, especially when the chorus of warnings included American business groups, whose support he will need when running for President. The real debate within the Administration pitted the pure economists against the technologists, the people who deal with the gross domestic product against those who specialize in British thermal units. The economists were deeply worried that any policy intended to drive down the use of fossil fuels -- especially a policy like the one the Administration favors, to put a cap on emissions of carbon dioxide and to let a market in emission permits dictate the price of fossil fuels -- would, in effect, amount to a system of energy rationing and energy taxes. In their rear-view mirrors, these advisers saw the economic disruptions of the oil shocks of the 1970's. But the technologists argued that the new policy would stimulate the appearance and rapid adoption of exciting new technologies that would make it possible to conserve energy and to produce more of it without fossil fuels. In their rear-view mirrors, they saw the efficiency gains and higher productivity that resulted from putting the nation on an energy diet in the 1970's and the 1980's. Both groups have economic models that prove their arguments. But no model is particularly well suited to predict what will happen to energy prices under the Clinton Administration's plan. That is because the plan calls for using inherently unpredictable free markets, rather than rigid regulations, to control emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The Administration wants to put a fixed overall cap on the total emissions of greenhouse gases by industries. Then it would issue individual companies permits that would allow them to release a certain amount of the gases. Limiting the supply of something increasingly in demand generally has the effect of driving up its price. But the Administration hopes that the permits, which would be traded on a free market, will limit the price pressures on energy and encourage innovation instead. For instance, a company that found a cheap way to control carbon dioxide emissions could sell its extra permits to a company with high control costs. Both companies would benefit economically from the transaction, and the market in permits would stimulate the invention and adoption of the cheapest possible control technologies. The Administration hopes to extend the permit system worldwide, allowing poorer countries with low emissions to raise money by selling part of their right to emit greenhouse gases to developed countries that have plenty of cash but have bumped into their pollution limits. Selling this at Kyoto, where developing nations are demanding deeper, faster cuts, is shaping up as a daunting task. But Mr. Clinton has tried to build his second term on proposals to marry government goals and market mechanisms, and has always prided himself on his deal-making abilities. This time, it may be the deal of the next century. GLOBAL WARMING

A conference that is supposed to cap more than two years of negotiations on what to do about global warming opened here today amid widespread concern that too many hard issues remained to allow the completion of an effective agreement before the talks end in nine days.''This negotiation hasn't matured; it's like new wine, and I don't know if we can ferment it in time,'' said Melinda Kimble, a senior State Department official who is leading the United States delegation until the higher-level ministerial phase of the talks begins next Monday. Today, however, Ms. Kimble hinted at some flexibility in the American position on setting targets for reduction of gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. After more than two years of bargaining, delegates from more than 150 countries are meeting for their final session in the high-tech Kyoto International Conference Hall, set among lovely hills, gardens and ponds in this ancient capital and repository of traditional Japanese culture. Surrounded by thousands of lobbyists and journalists from around the world, the negotiators are trying to agree not just on the amount by which emissions of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide should be cut over the next 10 to 20 years, and on what schedule, but also on how to share the burden, what gases to include and how to structure the immensely complex task. The job has turned out to be more complicated and difficult than was envisioned in March 1995, when parties to the 1992 Rio treaty on climate change decided that stronger action was needed, say many who are involved. In 1995, it was seen simply as a matter of deciding on a reduction target and a timetable for the industrialized countries. Now it has broadened to include the highly contentious role of developing nations, as well as a number of elaborate mechanisms by which the reductions might be carried out. As a result, many experts say, there is a distinct possibility that the talks will not be concluded here, at least not fully, and will have to be extended much as were negotiations on setting up the World Trade Organization -- a task that took more than a decade. But not everyone is pessimistic, and Ms. Kimble today sent a signal that prompted Michael Zammit Cutajar, the Maltese executive secretary of the United Nations climate secretariat, to declare that ''the negotiation is on its way.''Ms. Kimble said at the opening session of the conference of parties to the 1992 Rio climate treaty, under which the talks are being held, that the United States would no longer insist on a flat-rate, one-size-fits-all reduction target for all countries.  Instead, she said, the Americans were ''prepared to consider the possibility of limited, carefully bounded differentiation'' of targets among industrialized countries. Different targets for different countries, tailored to their economic and social profiles, have emerged as a possible way to get around the impasse among rich countries over what targets and timetables for reductions they should adopt. The European Union, Japan and Russia have all proposed variations on the theme of differentiation, but the United States had until today declined to join in what could ultimately be the key to an agreement on one of the talks' two central issues. On the other central issue -- how soon developing countries should be bound by specific reductions targets and timetables -- Ms. Kimble said they need not take the same form as those of rich nations. Rather, she suggested, the poorer countries might voluntarily, or as a result of future negotiations, adopt emission growth targets. The Clinton Administration has said it will sign no agreement that does not include all countries, and Ms. Kimble's statement was the clearest indication so far of what sort of participation by developing countries might be acceptable to the United States. But the developing countries have insisted all along, and reiterated today, that consideration of specific commitments for themselves is out of the question until the richer nations demonstrate that they are actually reducing emissions. The rationale is that since the rich countries got wealthy by burning the coal and oil that emit carbon dioxide and are the biggest emitters of the gas, they should lead the way. The United States insists that the developing countries should take on additional commitments, beyond a very general injunction to take steps to reduce emissions required by the 1992 treaty, because their emissions will outstrip those of the rich countries early in the next century. Scientists advising the negotiators say that if emissions are not reduced, the average global surface temperature will rise by 2 to 6 degrees Fahrenheit over the next century. This, say the scientists, would cause sea levels to rise, many coastal zones and small island countries to be inundated, climatic zones to shift, rainstorms to become heavier, floods and droughts to become worse, heat waves to become more lethal and some natural ecosystems to disappear. Any agreement in Kyoto on reductions would be considered a first step, since none of the proposals now on the table for industrialized countries' emission reductions would stop overall greenhouse gas concentrations from continuing to accumulate in the atmosphere; they would merely reduce the rate a bit. One of the most stringent reduction proposals on the table, advanced by the European Union, would limit overall emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide to 7.5 percent below 1990 levels by 2005 and 15 percent by 2010. The United States has proposed that levels be stabilized at 1990 levels in the period 2008 through 2112. The Administration says that would trim emissions by 30 percent from what they would be in the absence of any action. The American proposal diverges from all others under consideration in that it applies to a larger ''basket'' of six greenhouse gases that also includes hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexachloride. The Administration argues that this is an environmentally friendlier course, but a harder one that would not allow the Europeans to achieve their proposed goals.''I do not see a major difference between the U.S. and the E.U.,'' said Hiroshi Ohki of Japan, who today was elected president of the conference of parties to the 1992 treaty that are meeting here. He said he believed that the industrialized countries could come to an accommodation. In addition to the developing-country issue, a number of time-consuming and intricate technical problems must also be dealt with. Among these are the question of how to structure an emission-trading system that the United States says would cut the cost of reduction; which greenhouse gases to include in a reduction regime; the degree to which forests (which absorb carbon dioxide) should be considered in giving credit for reductions, and how differentiated targets could be devised and applied. If time runs out, say some representatives of environmental groups, extending the talks would be better than producing a flawed agreement that pleases no one -- and that might not be ratified by key countries like the United States -- just for the sake of having an accord. Mr. Zammit Cutajar remained optimistic. ''We have a lot of time,'' he said, ''10 whole days and nights.''

South Korea Resistance Delays I.M.F. Agreement  The Government of South Korea backtracked and reopened negotiations over a bailout plan for its economy after having announced a day earlier that an agreement had been reached. The International Monetary Fund has demanded the closure of insolvent banks and other strong steps. By this morning, all three South Korean television networks were reporting that the Government had partly capitulated on some bank closures. But South Korea's stocks and currency fell sharply again. [Page A1. ]The United States is prepared to contribute to the bailout of South Korea, but only if the South Korean Government agrees to the economic changes demanded by the International Monetary Fund, President Clinton said. [D4. ]Finance ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations endorsed a plan that gives the I.M.F. the leading role in future Asian financial crises. [D5. ]Manufacturing Pace Slows  A closely followed report by American factory purchasing executives showed manufacturing slowed in November, fresh evidence of a cooling economy. The National Association of Purchasing Management's index has fallen for three of the past four months after reaching a two-and-a-half-year high in July. [D2. ]Treasury prices rose after the National Association of Purchasing Management's report. The bond's yield fell to 6.04 percent, from 6.05 percent. [D10. ]F.T.C. Sticks to Its Standards  The Federal Trade Commission decided to preserve a standard a half-century old that requires a product to be ''all or virtually all'' made in the United States to be labeled as such, a standard often interpreted to mean 98 percent of a product's value. [A1. ]Fight Looms Over Pensions  Retirement advocates warned that a Labor Department plan seriously threatens pension fund accountability. Under the plan, large pension funds would no longer be required to disclose their assets annually. [D2. ]Iraqi Oil Compromise Offered  United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan has recommended that the Security Council consider increasing the amount of oil Iraq may sell in return for food and medicine, but he stopped short of proposing a specific figure. The Security Council is expected to maintain current Iraqi oil export levels of $2.1 billion every six months with a promise to consider increases in the future. [A13. ]Crude oil prices fell sharply on the action by the Secretary General and the decision by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise its output ceiling to 27.5 million barrels a day from 25.033 million. On other markets, coffee prices jumped. [D19. ]Global Warming Talks Begin  After more than two years of bargaining, delegates from 150 countries are meeting in Kyoto, Japan, for nine days of talks on what to do about global warming. [A10. ]Workers Are in Short Supply  There is a shortage of workers in the New York metropolitan area, but it is scattered, concentrated in pockets by industry, geography and skill level. [A1. ]Dollar Surges vs. YenThe dollar surged to its highest level in five and a half years against the yen on speculation that Japan might not do enough to bail out ailing banks and securities firms. The dollar closed at 128.91 yen, up from 127.82 yen on Friday. The dollar rose to 1.7771 marks, from 1.7645 marks. [D19. ]

I feel pretty, oh, so pretty,I feel pretty and witty and  not gay,But very pleased to put the issueOf those phone calls behind us. I usually have trouble expressing my emotions, but today I just want to sing. Today I don't even care about the Spot because, hey, I'm off the spot. Janet Reno has made me so darn giddy. It's not tactical joviality, as in my New Yorker interview with Joe Klein, who said I was trying too hard. Now I've learned to calibrate better and stop giggling and weeping just to show I can loosen up. Now I know how to do untactical joviality. I am just so relieved that I got this independent counsel monkey off my back. Freeh is no Hoover, thank goodness. He just stamps his feet. Way to go, Janet! I can admit now that Bill and I were really scared for awhile that the big gal was not on the team. We thought she might be some alligator-wrestling, man-hating oddball who'd tar our hides just to prove her Feisty Independence. Wow! She sure has been on a world-class ego trip. Stringing out our misery until the last possible second, enjoying all the attention. Well, she won't be around for the Gore Administration. She can head off into the sunset with Donna Shalala in that truck she dreams about with the cooler and the stove and the dresser and the cot. I'm going to have someone more dependable at Justice, my own Ed Meese, someone who appreciates the importance of a very, very narrow interpretation of the law. Bill says now we can finally get back to business as usual. Of course,  stepping in messes is his business as usual. Being his Vice President is like being one of those soldiers in World War II who used to walk in front of Patton's tank to check for mines. No wonder my nerves are shot. No one understands how hard it is for me. The whole Prince Albert thing. So much is expected. I look so great on paper. I look so great in person. But I have a nameless dread of failure. Bill says we have to act nonchalant. Geez, he was even nonchalant about Saddam. But we're not free and clear yet. We still have the Babbitt investigation, and that one may be tougher to slither out of. While the coast is sort of clear, I'm having a coming-out party this week, running hither and yon, talking about AIDS, Internet safeguards, education, the environment, setting up my issues. Hillary's annoyed at me. She thinks I didn't try hard enough on fast track. She thinks I'm coming across as too much of a pantywaist greenie. She doesn't want me screwing up Bill's legacy as the leader of a global network of New Democrats. Just get used to it, as McCurry told the idiot press corps. It's my turn. Uh-oh. I feel the jitters coming back. I don't feel like singing any more. I don't feel pretty. I mean, I know I am pretty. I just don't feel that way right now. My rivals -- those vultures -- are circling. They figure they can use this sleaze stuff to knock me off my throne. Will that loser Fred Thompson ever shut up? Senators from Tennessee sure aren't what they used to be. He got out there last night yammering again about the Troubling Array of Facts. Just get used to it. Lizard Boy gave a speech up at Harvard, my Harvard, last night practically announcing his candidacy. He's been working on that pounding fist/karate chop action, trying to look forceful. ''We need a Democratic Party where principles trump tactics,'' Gephardt said. ''We need a Democratic Party that is a movement for change -- and not a money machine.'' Gee whiz, who's that aimed at? Just get used to it. Cosmic Bob had breakfast with reporters yesterday, practically announcing his candidacy. Kerrey complained that U.S. policy against Saddam is not muscular enough. Who's that aimed at? Just get used to it. Boring Bradley is polishing his Q rating with those treacly homilies about the real America on CBS  News. They're like gauzy campaign ads, only he doesn't even have to pay for them with soft money! He did one on his basketball career and said he ''only played clean.'' Who's that aimed at? Just get used to it. Heading off to Kyoto now to talk global warming. I'll try not to get too charged up about the earth disappearing. (Like my hair.) Anyhow, I like the earth today.

To the Editor:While I enjoyed your fascinating supplement on the climate conference in Kyoto, Japan (Global Warming, special section, Dec. 1), I was disappointed by the absence of environmental education from the articles. Education should be a top priority when discussing environmental issues, but we continually ignore this preventative way of dealing with ecological problems and settle for putting out fires instead. Environmental education policy is especially significant this year as the National Environmental Education Act of 1990 is up for reauthorization in Congress. If it is given the same amount of public discussion as the talks in Kyoto, the law may help to prevent the environmental firefighting that has become so common in recent years. ROB ALEXANDER  Bloomington, Ind., Dec. 2, 1997

It may require a near-miracle for the 150-plus nations now meeting in Kyoto, Japan, to produce, in six days, a comprehensive treaty on global warming. The issue is complex, the disagreements wide. But anyone who has taken the trouble to cut through the diplomatic posturing knows there is room for compromise. At the very least, the negotiators can produce a broad memorandum of understanding that kicks the process forward and provides a firm basis for detailed negotiations. Failure to do so would be costly. If the world is shown to be incapable of a collective response to a collective problem, whatever sense of urgency the general public has about climate change could evaporate. Failure would also slow the search for technologies that could reduce the world's dependence on coal and other fossil fuels that contribute to the rise in atmospheric temperatures. Fear of failure is essentially what drove President Clinton to send Al Gore to Kyoto next week. The Vice President's ostensible mission is to prevent the American position from being shouted down by the Europeans, who think it is too weak. Yet there are some countries, oil exporters like Saudi Arabia and coal-dependent nations like Australia, that want no agreement. Mr. Gore's real mission is to lure both sides to a workable middle ground. That will mean adjustments in everyone's position on two highly contentious issues. Targets and Timetables. Mr. Clinton wants to reduce carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels somewhere between 2008 and 2012, and cut them by unspecified amounts thereafter. The Europeans want to cut emissions 15 percent below 1990 levels by 2010, a goal Mr. Clinton regards as incompatible with economic growth. But surely there is room for compromise here, either by picking an arithmetic middle ground, or -- instead of insisting on a one-size-fits-all formula -- by setting different targets for different countries, tailored to their economic and social profiles. Developing Countries. The developing countries argue that they need more time to grow and cannot be forced to cut their fossil-fuel emissions. The United States Senate, however, has told Mr. Clinton it will not ratify a treaty that does not include developing countries, and nearly everyone agrees that unless these countries sign on at some point, any agreement will be worthless. The answer here could be to require the developing countries to sign the treaty but allow them to negotiate timetables and targets down the road. Another answer could lie in a novel proposal, offered by the Americans, under which rich countries would subsidize cleaner technologies in poorer countries. Kyoto may yet produce a treaty. But even if it does not, it will not have been a failure if it moves everyone to common ground.

High-pressure steam heat has always been the life-force of BASF A.G.'s giant chemical complex here, where one street is named Ammonia and another is named after a catastrophic explosion that killed scores of workers in the 1920's. The old power plant still burns coal by the bargeload, pumping high-pressure steam to heat reactions for making plastics and fibers and spewing about four million tons of ''greenhouse'' gases into the atmosphere every year. Until recently, this complex burned so much coal that the company owned its own mines. Yet as American and European negotiators battle in Kyoto, Japan, over a proposed treaty to reduce the output of greenhouse gases implicated in global warming, this complex marks a fairly typical example of how the two sides often seem to be on different planets. While American industry has warned that mandatory reductions would lead to factory shutdowns and hundreds of thousands of lost jobs, BASF executives say they are not worried. Regardless of what is decided in Kyoto, BASF executives predict, this complex will emit 25 percent less carbon dioxide in the year 2000 than it did in 1990, well ahead of the ambitious goals advocated by the European Union. ''The goals are absolutely achievable,'' said Max Dietrich Kley, BASF's managing director in charge of financial affairs. Europe already releases less than half the volume per person of greenhouse gases as the United States. And it is urging a 15 percent cut in the industrialized world's discharges from 1990 levels, compared to the Clinton Administration's call for ''stabilizing'' emissions at those rates. Compared to American business groups, European industry has been more receptive to the costly cleanup. Manufacturing groups are pursuing their own ambitious clean-air commitments. The debate here is not about whether to make steep reductions in carbon dioxide output, but how steep those reductions should be. By any measure, Europe will have a hard time meeting its own ambitious goals. Pollution from cars and trucks is soaring, as traffic volume increases far more rapidly than automobile efficiency. Manufacturing executives warn that even big improvements in efficiency will be diluted by growth in overall production. And European industry has been fighting various proposals for stiff new ''carbon'' taxes that are tied to the use of fossil fuels. Thus far they have not gone anywhere.''We are very skeptical about the European goals,'' said Joachim Hein, head of environmental policy at the German Federation of Industry, which has pledged steep voluntary reductions. ''It's easy to put more burdens on industry, but the problem is much more multi-faceted than that. What we are saying is that industry will do its best.''Critics note that Europe has benefited from a few one-time historical events. The reunification of Germany in 1990 led to a huge reduction in emissions, because the former East Germany's bankrupt and filthy factories and power plants were quickly demolished. Between 1990 and 1995, carbon dioxide output in eastern Germany plunged by nearly half, to 172 million tons from 305 million. Britain got a similar boost when the Government abandoned protections for domestic coal producers, which sparked a rapid shift to cleaner natural gas. Part of what makes Europe look ''greener,'' moreover, is nuclear power, considered an environmental villain in North America. Nuclear power supplies 75 percent of the electricity in France, 50 percent in Sweden and 30 percent in Germany, compared with 20 percent in the United States. As Europe's economy picks up, some energy-conservation projections are already falling by the wayside. The Netherlands Federation of Industry, for example, committed itself to improve energy efficiency by 2 percent a year. But Dutch carbon dioxide emissions actually grew  slightly last year, largely because of increased economic growth.''What we have done so far is follow a 'no-regrets' policy,'' said Wiel Klerken, director of environmental  issues at the Dutch trade association. ''In other words, these are measures that are good anyway, even if there was not a CO2  problem, because you save money. But when you come to 15 percent reductions, you come into the area of 'regrets policy,' and so we think the current goals are too ambitious.''Nor have European countries entirely figured out how to distribute the burden of making changes. Under the European Union's so-called ''bubble'' concept, Germany agreed to assume a huge share of the total European burden -- a 25 percent cut  in emissions by 2010. The bargain would allow poorer countries like Portugal and Ireland to increase  emissions as much as 30 percent. The problem is that even if each country met its obligations, which is far from assured, emissions of greenhouse gases across Europe would fall by only 10 percent, and national leaders would still need to search for more cuts. By any measure, the efforts within Europe far outpace anything even contemplated in the United States. The German Federation of Industry, the umbrella association that covers manufacturers of everything from cars to steel to chemicals, recently released audited results showing a 20 percent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions since 1990. But those gains are in danger of being undermined by some of the same trends as in the United States: faster growth in manufacturing and an intensified love affair with cars. Officials at the German industrial federation emphasize that the demolition of old East German factories and power plants is complete. And while existing factories will inevitably become more efficient, those advances will also be diluted by continued growth in production. Pollution from cars and trucks is even more threatening. While cars are generally much smaller than those in the United States, they are getting bigger, heavier and more numerous. The number of privately owned cars in the former East Germany is expected to double between 1990 and 2005, and the number of commercial vehicles to increase six-fold in the same period. Car and truck traffic is already the second-biggest source of carbon dioxide after power plants in the European Union, and officials predict traffic-related emissions will soar 39 percent by the year 2010 if current policies remain in place. Yet thus far, European Union proposals for ''carbon taxes'' on gasoline have gone nowhere, and many experts worry that introducing them would jeopardize national competitiveness if other industrial countries refuse to follow suit. To some extent, European countries are victims of their own energy thrift. Energy prices here are far higher than those in the United States, and mandatory conservation measures are far more widespread. That makes further choices more difficult and more expensive. Buildings, for example, are already being constructed according to far stricter energy-efficiency standards than in the United States. The next big round of improvements can only come from renovating old buildings -- an expensive job that governments cannot simply order property owners to carry out.''Buildings will be a major challenge,'' said Alfred Voss, head of the Institute for Energy Economics and Rational Energy Use at the University of Stuttgart. Homeowners often have little incentive to invest in more efficient boilers or thermal windows, because the costs are high and the payoff can take years. Commercial landlords are often resistant as well, especially if tenants pick up the costs of heating and electricity. Europe has nothing to apologize to the rest of the world about, of course. Compared with efforts being made almost anywhere else, European companies are models of environmental enlightenment. The biggest single element reducing carbon dioxide emissions here in Ludwigshafen, for example, is a one-month-old ''co-generation'' plant that produces both electricity and high-pressure steam heat. It will burn natural gas, which emits one-half as much carbon-dioxide as a coal-fired power plant, to produce all the steam heat that BASF needs.  Excess steam pressure will be used to run electric turbines. BASF can buy whatever electricity it wants, and the rest will be fed into the public electricity grid. Overall, company executives say, the new plant produces heat and electricity at about 88 percent efficiency, more than double that of the old coal plant. Other co-generation ventures are underway elsewhere. Hoechst A.G., the chemical and pharmaceutical conglomerate, is underwriting an 800-megawatt plant in Frankfurt. BASF is also systematically slashed its reliance on fossil fuels by re-cycling heat from one process to another. The complex here at Ludwigshafen relies on coal or gas for only 25 percent of the energy it uses, down from 75 percent 20 years ago.  And deeper reductions are on the way. The company's newest plant, in Antwerp, relies on fossil fuels for only 5 percent of its total energy use. BASF is not just trying to be a good world citizen. Its main motivation is to save money -- and in that, it exemplifies Europe's pervasive culture of energy conservation. German energy prices are among the highest in the world, in part because the Government protected domestic coal producers for decades. European gasoline costs between $3 and $4 a gallon, roughly three times higher than American prices. Yet, the political debate is not whether to lower the huge fuel taxes that are responsible, but whether to raise them. Electricity and heat costs are often higher, especially in countries like Germany that have been protecting domestic coal producers. For that reason, few protest the stringent energy-efficiency standards for new buildings here in Germany. Also largely for that reason, air conditioning is almost non-existent in homes and is absent from many office buildings. Lights in public hallways are designed to switch off when people leave. And thanks in part to shorter distances within Europe, trains remain a far more important mode of passenger transportation than airplanes, which consume much more energy. Political support for deep reductions in greenhouse emissions has been strong across Europe. Even Great Britain, which often displays American-style hostility to regulation, has supported tough action on greenhouse gases under both Conservative and Labor governments.''In Europe, there is a perception that energy is expensive and will continue to be expensive in the future, while Americans have a perception that energy is cheap and will continue to be cheap,'' said Lee Solsbery, director of energy and environmental issues at the International Energy Agency in Paris. The key challenge, said Professor Voss of the University of Stuttgart, will be to come up with policies that promote deeper reductions and yet do not jeopardize economic growth. ''If you are going to make real progress, you have to treat economic and environmental goals. The danger is that people will not do that, which could mean that you reach neither goal.''Correction:  December 6, 1997, SaturdayA chart on Thursday with an article about European efforts to reduce emissions of heat-trapping ''greenhouse'' gases showed erroneous figures for per capita emissions of carbon dioxide in the United States and Europe in 1995. A corrected chart appears today on page A10. Correction: December 6, 1997, SaturdayA chart on Thursday with an article about European efforts to reduce emissions of heat-trapping ''greenhouse'' gases showed erroneous figures for per capita emissions of carbon dioxide in the United States and Europe in 1995. A corrected chart appears today on page A10.

Elements of a possible agreement on cutting industrialized countries' emissions of heat-trapping waste gases have begun to emerge from intensive negotiations here, and today it was widely believed that the countries could reach agreement on this central issue next week. But there was little apparent movement on a second key issue, that of the immediate role to be played by developing countries in controlling the gases, and that issue continued to threaten the overall prospects for the success of the talks. It also raised the possibility that while some sort of agreement might be achieved, the United States might find it unacceptable and refuse to sign what would be called the Kyoto Protocol. As the 10-day session on what to do about global warming reached its halfway mark, attention turned to the expected arrival on Monday of Vice President Al Gore and high-level ministers from more than 150 countries, marking the start of the talks' decisive final three days. Awaiting them will probably be the rough ingredients of an agreement on targets, timetables and structures for cutting rich nations' emissions of carbon dioxide and other atmospheric gases that scientists say are warming the atmosphere. ''I think the elements are there,'' said Raul Estrada-Oyuela of Argentina, the chairman of the talks. Pieces of an agreement ''are beginning to take shape,'' said Melinda Kimble, a senior State Department official who has led the United States delegation in the early phase of the Kyoto discussions. ''We need to tweak them a little more to get them to fit together.''One emerging element is called differentiation, an arrangement whereby countries would adopt different levels of emissions reductions, tailored to their particular national circumstances. Differentiation presents a way around an impasse over a uniform, flat-rate reduction target for everyone. The United States said for the first time on Monday that it would consider the differentiation approach. Initially, the Americans proposed a one-size-fits-all target of cutting average emissions levels in the period 2008 through 2012 back to 1990 levels. The Europeans proposed a flat-rate reduction of 15 percent below 1990 levels by 2010. Both sets of targets and timetables would be legally binding, and both remain formally on the table at least for now. A number of countries, including the United States, argue that the range of differentiation should be kept narrow. One way to achieve this would be simply to set a target range for reductions -- say, between 5 and 10 percent, or zero to 5 percent, below 1990 levels. Another way would be to adopt stringent objective criteria, based on countries' varying economic profiles. A key holdout on differentiation has been the European Union. Many other delegations find this stance unfair, since the European group proposes a form of differentiation for itself. Under what is called the European ''bubble'' proposal, Europe as a whole would be bound to a firm target. But some countries would be allowed to fall short of the target -- in one case, by 40 percent -- while others make up by exceeding it. The Europeans have been under intense pressure from the Japanese and the Americans to justify the bubble concept. Europe, in fact, has appeared on the defensive over the issue this week, and some insiders say the pressure on the bubble is a tactic to help extract concessions from the Europeans on other issues, including differentiation for all countries and emissions trading, a mechanism heavily favored by the United States. In emissions trading, a country or industrial company would be able to meet its emissions reduction target by cutting emissions itself or by buying reductions from another country or company that achieved excess cuts, or both. Proponents of this approach argue that it provides an incentive for companies and countries that find it relatively easy to cut emissions to go further than required and then profit by selling the excess to companies that find it harder or more costly to reduce emissions on their own. The proponents say this approach achieves reductions most efficiently and cheaply. The Americans say that market-based, cost-saving mechanisms like trading are essential to any long-term system for emissions reduction, and that at this early stage of a decades-long process such structural matters are as important as the reduction targets themselves. Meanwhile, the developing countries are continuing to insist that they will take on no further obligations -- beyond a general one requiring them to adopt measures to control greenhouse gases -- until the rich nations act. But unless they do, some key United States senators say, the Senate is unlikely to ratify any agreement emerging from Kyoto. The senators, in fact, have become more than shadow players in the talks. Several are observers here and have had discussions with a number of delegates. Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, said here yesterday that he believed the Senate would approve an agreement ''if it feels like all countries are reasonably and responsibly sharing in the solution.''No one expects the developing countries to take on the same commitments as the rich nations, and a number of possible options for strengthening developing countries' participation are being considered. One would be a legally binding commitment to limit the growth of developing-country emissions -- though not reduce them outright -- after about 2010. A proposal to begin talks next year leading to such commitments for all but the poorest countries by 2014 was offered formally tonight by New Zealand with American backing, and it ignited fierce opposition. The chairman of the developing country caucus, Dr. Mark Mwandosya of Tanzania, said his group would simply refuse to take part in the preparatory talks. Another option would be to allow developing countries to take on legally binding commitments voluntarily, as their economies grew and matured. A third option would be what is called ''joint implementation.'' In this arrangement, highly favored by the United States, a business or government in a rich country finances or provides the technology for a specific emissions reduction project in a developing country -- a more efficient, emissions-saving power plant, for instance. The donor country or company would share credit for any emission reductions. More than two dozen experimental pilot projects are now under way. A fourth option, proposed by Brazil and favored by the developing countries as a group, would require rich countries that fail to meet targets to pay into a fund that would finance the adoption of greenhouse-friendly energy technologies by developing countries. Voluntary solutions might not be acceptable to the Senate, Senator Baucus said. Senator Chuck Hagel, a conservative Nebraska Republican who heads a key committee, emphatically agreed and said that new developing-country commitments must begin at the same time as those of the rich nations. Some environmentalists here are urging the United States delegation to ignore the Senate and go for the best agreement possible. Ratification does not have to come immediately, they say, and in the meantime the United States can proceed with its own domestic emissions reduction program, as President Clinton has said it would do if no satisfactory agreement is reached here. Then, at some future date, the United States might ratify the treaty. Other interested parties, like Kevin Fay, who heads a moderate business group called the International Climate Change Partnership, say it would be better to put off discussions beyond Kyoto if it looks like no agreement acceptable to the Senate is possible. To do otherwise, he said, risks poisoning efforts to get Congress to approve funds for the domestic emissions-reduction programs. Not everyone is gloomy about the developing-country issue. Mr. Estrada had this to say: ''The only thing the developing countries are waiting for is for the developed countries to make commitments. The moment we have that, everything else will fall into place.''

There was optimism at the global-warming talks in Kyoto that industrial countries might reach an agreement next week setting targets and timetables for the central issue of cutting their emissions of heat-trapping waste gases. Pieces of an agreement ''are beginning to take shape,'' an American negotiator said. But there appears to have been little headway on the related issue of how the developing countries would control waste gases in the immediate future. That issue threatens the success of the whole meeting. It is also possible that Washington would object to the agreement reached and refuse to sign it. Article, page A10.

INTERNATIONALA3-11Netanyahu Calls for Delay In Palestinian Transfers  After meeting in Paris with Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said his Government wanted to wait at least five months before handing any more territory to the Palestinians. A1New Mayor for Mexico City  Cuauhtemoc Cardenas Solorzano was sworn in as the first elected mayor of Mexico's huge capital city. Mr. Cardenas, who many Mexicans believe was fraudulently deprived of victory in presidential elections in 1988, vowed to ''take this city away from the criminals.''A3Partial Progress in Kyoto  An agreement on cutting the industrial countries' emissions of heat-trapping waste gases seemed possible at a conference on global warming in Japan. But the prospects were threatened by a lack of progress on the immediate role that developing countries should play in controlling the gases. A10Irish May Drop Belfast Claims  Prime Minister Bertie Ahern said the Irish Republic was prepared to drop its constitutional claim to sovereignty in the British province of Northern Ireland. He said a referendum could be held to change the Constitution. His remarks were not taken kindly by leaders on both sides of the peace talks in Belfast. A8Swiss Banks Pay Some Claims  Swiss banks said they have begun paying claims related to dormant accounts dating back to World War II. A spokeswoman for the Swiss Bankers Association said the first payments went to ''10 or 12'' cases and that ''30 to 40'' others were ready for payment, but she declined to specify the amounts or the nationalities involved. The banks published lists of dormant accounts in July and October that identified some 5,500 accounts opened by foreigners before the end of the war and now worth around $47 million. A8Strike Goes Forward in Israel  A three-day-old strike by about 700,000 public sector workers in Israel appeared likely to continue after unions pledged not to capitulate to a pending court order that may impose fines on union leaders. Halted airline service has stranded thousands of passengers in the airport at Jerusalem. Cash machines began to run dry, as did irrigation pipes to many communities and farms. A6The Price of Freedom in Congo  President Laurent Kabila of Congo told 31 detainees accused of embezzling state money during the time when Mobutu Sese Seko, the late dictator, was in power that they could buy their freedom by repaying the state. Mr. Kabila urged the detainees, who have spent up to six months in jail awaiting trials, to ''pay what you owe.'' Mr. Kabila toppled Mr. Mobutu in May in the former Zaire and jailed numerous cronies of the old regime. Many others fled before Mr. Kabila's forces reached the capital.(Reuters) NATIONALA12-17, A20Police Official 'Confident' Of End to Ramsey Case  Almost one year after the killing of JonBenet Ramsey, the new commander of the police investigation in Boulder, Colo., said the little girl's parents remain under ''an umbrella of suspicion.'' Commander Mark Beckner, who took over the investigation nine weeks ago, said he was confident that the mystery ''will be solved,'' but declined to estimate when he would have a case to present to Boulder's District Attorney, Alexander M. Hunter. A12Retreat on AIDS Spending  Less than six months after announcing that it hoped to expand Medicaid to cover all low-income people who are infected with the AIDS virus, the Clinton Administration has backed away from the plan, saying it cannot be done nationwide without increasing spending. A14100 Arrested on Drug Charges  Federal and local authorities from around the nation announced that they had smashed one of the biggest methamphetamine networks in the United States. They reported the arrest of 100 suspects and the breaking up of a ring that had been a major American contractor of Mexico's largest methamphetamine gang. A12Court to Hear Schools Case  The Supreme Court agreed to decide when school districts can be found liable under Federal law for a teacher's sexual abuse of a student. A15Questions on Shuttle Mission  The astronauts on the space shuttle Columbia returned to a lukewarm welcome and an inquiry into their bungled release of a satellite during the most recent mission. A12Tobacco Makers Obey Order  Four giants of the tobacco industry ended a fight with a loyal friend in Congress when they turned over more than 800 internal documents that some investigators suspect hold clues to criminal wrongdoing. The four cigarette-makers complied with subpoenas issued the day before by Representative Thomas J. Bliley Jr., a Virginia Republican who heads the Commerce Committee. Mr. Bliley has long been one of the industry's strongest allies. A20McVeigh Described as Zealot  Lawyers for Terry L. Nichols, who is charged with murder and conspiracy in the April 19, 1995, Federal Building bombing in Oklahoma City that killed 168 people, tried to paint Timothy J. McVeigh as an anti-Government zealot who frequently handed out extremist literature and even wore a T-shirt with a wanted poster for Abraham Lincoln to a child's birthday party. A13Inquiry on Arlington Burial  President Clinton ordered an investigation into whether the late U.S. Ambassador to Switzerland, M. Larry Lawrence, lied about his service in the merchant marine during World War II and was appropriately granted a waiver to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery. A17NEW YORK/REGIONB1-5Giuliani Moves to Cement City Control of Gambling  Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, saying he is now convinced casino gambling is coming to New York City, took two major steps to cement the city's control over gambling when it arrives. He said his administration is thinking seriously about where to build a casino in the city, specifically citing Governors Island as a perfect location for a Monte Carlo-like casino and resort. At the same time, he imposed sharp new restrictions on shipboard gambling in New York City, which could begin in earnest next year, and made it clear that the same restrictions would eventually apply to casinos on land. A13 Charged in T.W.A. Theft  A T.W.A. pilot involved in the investigation of the Flight 800 crash has admitted stealing pieces of the reassembled wreckage and giving them to an author who argued that a missile downed the jetliner, the pilot's lawyer said. The pilot, Terrell Stacey, is likely to plead guilty to a misdemeanor theft charge in the case, the lawyer said, and is cooperating with a Federal investigation of the author, James Sanders, and his wife, Elizabeth Sanders, a T.W.A. flight attendant. The Sanderses were charged with the more serious crime of illegally removing plane crash evidence. B1ARTS & IDEASB7-14Survivor's Papers Donated  In spirited bidding in London, the personal documentary history of a Jewish woman who survived Hitler's Germany by assuming an Aryan identity and marrying a Nazi sold at auction for $169,250, five times the top estimate by Sotheby's. The Edith Hahn Archive, as the hundreds of pages of intimate letters, Nazi documents and photographs are called, was purchased by two wealthy Philadelphia businessmen. They said that after having read an account of Ms. Hahn and the auction in The New York Times, they agreed to split the price and donate the contents of the archive to the Holocaust Museum in Washington. B7SPORTSC1-6EDITORIALA18-19Editorials: Morgenthau v. White; Mexico's vulnerable workers; the fight over ''Amistad''; turmoil in the Subcontinent. Columns: Maureen Dowd, Frank Rich. BUSINESS DAYD1-14Unemployment at Record Low  The American economy showed surprising strength last month by creating 404,000 new jobs as the unemployment rate edged down to another 24-year low and wages surged. A1U.S. Loses Trade Case  The World Trade Organization stunned the United States and Eastman Kodak by vindicating Japan in a dispute over whether the Japanese unfairly protect their photographic film market. The ruling sided completely with Kodak rival Fuji Photo Film and marked an embarrassing failure for the Clinton Administration, which had portrayed the dispute as a challenge to what it contends is a basic problem with the way Japan's economic system works. A1Korean Bailout Raises Doubts  Details of South Korea's record bailout agreement depict a broad and bold attempt to reform the world's 11th-largest economy, but the agreement also contains vague provisions that are raising doubts about how it will be enforced. D1Chain to Make Barney's Bid  The DFS Group, the world's largest chain of duty-free shops, is preparing to make a bid for Barney's Inc., the New York luxury retailer now in bankruptcy, executives involved in the negotiations said. D1Business DigestD1OBITUARIESD15John E. Moss  The dogged California Congressman whose long, lonely fight against Government secrecy led to the landmark Freedom of Information Act in 1966 was 84. D15BridgeB13WeatherD14CrosswordB12

On weekends, when Per Volund goes jogging around Copenhagen harbor, he is drawn to a pier with a row of sleek, modern windmills. As he watches the fiberglass blades spin in the breeze, he knows that they are sending electricity to the grid -- and money into his pocket. Mr. Volund belongs to a cooperative that bought and installed four 160-foot towers on this prime spot by the sea. He is also part of a large Danish movement -- the Organization for Renewable Energy -- with a daring and ambitious goal. Its backers set out a decade ago to prove that even if big business or utilities had no interest in such experiments, private citizens could produce inexpensive  energy that did not pollute.''We call it power from the people,'' said Mr. Volund, a 33-year-old engineer. ''We do it because we believe in it.''Like Mr. Volund, thousands of committed environmentalists, including students, professionals and farmers, have dug into their savings to buy turbines and licenses to operate them. They lobbied the Government and the utilities until they finally agreed to buy wind energy. The result has been a quiet revolution. Today, close to 100,000 Danes own shares in the hundreds of small cooperatives that operate 4,700 windmills here. And they are making profits. Wind power generates 6 percent of Denmark's electricity, giving this country the highest per capita output of wind energy in the world. While the American wind industry has stalled, wind power is booming across Europe, encouraged by improved technology, falling costs and Government incentives like tax credits and guaranteed prices. Several governments have set targets to stimulate production. European policymakers point to the boom as a key example of how pollution can be cut without jeopardizing jobs or economic growth. With  windmills springing up from the coasts of Sweden to the tip of southern Spain, Europe's wind industry already employs 20,000 people. One reason for the growth is that the European Union wants to diversify its energy sources while clamping down on polluters; almost no country could get the political support to expand nuclear plants. The other, more compelling, reason is that in many areas wind power is becoming economically viable. Powerful new wind turbines can already generate electricity far less expensively than solar panels, biomass or other nontraditional sources, according to the International Energy Agency, a research organization based in Paris. Its studies show that wind energy is now becoming competitive with electricity from Europe's ubiquitous oil-  and coal-fired power plants. For wind, supply starts at the windmills, which do not require mines, oil fields, tankers, dumps, refineries and combustion. Moreover, windmills do not emit sulphur dioxide, which causes acid rain, and carbon dioxide, the most widespread greenhouse gas.''Wind energy is now one of the cheapest ways to cut back on greenhouse gases,'' said Ritt Bjerregaard, the European Union Commissioner for the Environment. The future role of renewable energy is on the agenda for the international conference on global warming in Kyoto, Japan. Before the conference, the European Union announced a plan to double the share of renewable energy in its 15 member countries -- to 12 percent by 2010. Today's 6 percent share comes largely from hydroelectric power. But the new $23 billion plan is a key part of the union's strategy to cut greenhouse gases. It will provide additional  funds and incentives for wind, solar and other projects. In wind power, Europe has already overtaken the United States, which led the drive to wind in the 1980's. Europe's capacity of 4,100 megawatts now amounts to two and a half times that of the United States, with Germany alone surpassing the capacity of American wind farms. The way wind is produced underlines a contrast between Europe and the United States. American entrepreneurs, seeing wind as big business, built large wind farms with huge numbers of turbines. When oil prices fell and tax credits were cut because of policy changes, growth stalled. In Northern Europe, wind power is basically a cottage industry. Denmark, Germany, Sweden and the Netherlands have each spawned grass-roots movements with small groups of often politically motivated investors installing one or a few machines at a time and scattering them. In Spain, Britain and Greece, the clusters are larger because money has been provided by local governments and utilities. The latest trend in Europe is to start building wind farms offshore, where there is more wind and fewer complaints that they clutter up the landscape.''Many projects are small because this fits in with our history,'' said Marielle van Aggelen, a consultant at the Dutch Bureau for Wind Energy. Indeed, less than a century ago, before national grids expanded and electricity output became centralized, much of Europe was studded with the traditional windmills, often privately owned.

If the Clinton Administration is struggling to strike a deal on global warming at talks in Kyoto, Japan, that is partly because warring domestic interest groups have spent many months -- and millions of dollars -- on highly effective lobbying campaigns designed to limit the White House's options. Environmental groups, traditionally closely allied with the Administration, have succeeded in convincing the public that the threat of climate change caused by emissions of greenhouse gases is a settled scientific reality that must be confronted head-on. They say the Administration's proposal for a treaty is too mild, and that a European alternative would be better. But powerful business interests have emphasized the economic risks and the need to bring developing countries into any binding new treaty, arguments that have strongly influenced the Senate, where any pact must be ratified. They say the Administration is going too far and too fast, the more so since the Third World is balking at a bigger role. The private-sector lobbying, more intense, prolonged and costly than usual in the realm of diplomacy, has reached a fevered pitch this week in Kyoto, but it has been playing out in Washington for years. The antagonists include big corporations with revenues larger than the economies of little nations, labor unions with more members than some countries' armed forces, industrial trade associations with headquarters grander than embassies, and a corps of professional environmentalists that rivals the diplomatic corps in polish and pinstripes.''It is as if a large chunk of the lobbying community from the capital has been transported from Washington to Kyoto for two weeks,'' Senator Joseph Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, marveled in a telephone interview from Kyoto, where he is an observer. Although the lobbyists are in Kyoto in force, they are relegated to the sidelines. ''Every night the U.S. delegation will come in and brief the 100 or so industry nongovernmental organizations who are present,'' said Constance Holmes, a lobbyist in Kyoto for the Global Climate Coalition, which represents major United States industries. ''They brief the U.S. business community for half an hour, and then they brief the environmental community for half an hour.''For the past two years, more than 150 nations have been trying to devise a new, stricter treaty to replace the largely voluntary one that they agreed upon five years ago in Rio de Janeiro. It is intended to set binding limits on emissions of greenhouse gases by industrial nations. Because confronting global warming means altering energy patterns throughout society, a solution to the emerging risk of climate change affects practically every conceivable interest group. Opposing a binding treaty are car makers and corn farmers, steel mills and oil refineries, electricity producers and the coal miners who stoke their boilers. They claim that cutbacks in emissions would raise energy costs sharply, rippling through the economy, creating inflation and destroying jobs or sending them overseas. Favoring a treaty are the main national environmental groups, who have spent a decade putting the issue on the global agenda. Among their most influential allies are businesses involved in conservation and renewable energy.''This is more than the environmental community has done on any single issue in 10 years,'' said Philip Clapp, head of the National Environmental Trust, an advocacy group set up three years ago to organize sophisticated media campaigns on major environmental issues. But Eileen Claussen, who was an Administration climate negotiator until she left the State Department recently to work as an environmental consultant, said that the industry campaign in Congress was especially effective.''By targeting the Congress, the industries responsible for the advertising campaign have widened the rift between the two branches,'' Ms. Claussen said. ''This has had the effect of pulling the United States farther away from most other countries in the negotiations, and hardening its position on what would constitute an acceptable target and on what should be required of developing countries.''For months, the news media have carried a steady drumbeat of advertising on the climate issue. The Global Climate Information Project, an ad hoc industry coalition, announced in September that it would spend $13 million on advertisements to defeat a treaty. Rather than attacking the scientific argument, the group's advertisements used the threat of price increases and a fairness issue: that many developing countries whose emissions of greenhouse gases are growing rapidly would not be held to the same obligations as the industrial nations. The advertisements echo the industry's slogan: ''It's not global, and it won't work.''Environmental groups swung into action, calling the advertisements misleading. They noted that details of the treaty were still being negotiated, that the Administration was calling for developing countries to play a role and that economists were divided on what the economic consequences were likely to be. The environmental groups demanded that CNN, the only national network that would air the advertisement during news programs, stop running it. At first the network complied, but it later reversed itself. Although environmental groups have not been able to afford an advertising campaign on the scale of the industry group, the Sierra Club produced a television spot recently that began with a picture of the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein, whom it called an influential oil cartel leader, and castigated auto companies for producing gas guzzlers. And the National Council of Churches produced a spot featuring the poet Maya Angelou making a moral argument to save the planet. It is being aired free of charge, largely on Christian broadcasting stations, as a public service announcement. There is little sign that the industry's campaign has moved the public. In a New York Times poll last month, only 6 percent of adults surveyed by telephone nationwide recalled seeing industry advertisements opposing a treaty. Of those who recalled the advertisements, two-thirds said they were not influenced, and the remainder were as likely to have been swayed in favor as against the treaty. But that does not matter, said Kathleen Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania and an expert in media campaigns.''The goal of these sorts of campaigns is not ordinarily to change attitudes on the part of the public,'' Ms. Jamieson said. ''It is to persuade the legislative body that you are a player. You are involved, and you have ads on. And thus, in the next election campaign, you will have an effect by ultimately using advertising against them.'' It is in Congress, in fact, where the industry campaign appears to have the edge. Earlier this year, business groups persuaded the Senate to pass a resolution insisting that developing countries like China play a bigger role in addressing the problem. The resolution was sponsored by Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, where coal dominates the economy, and Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, a Republican who adamantly opposes a new treaty. Their argument is exactly the one the industry has been pressing in its advertising, and by October, when the President announced the United States negotiating policy, he, too, insisted that a treaty must include a role for key developing countries. But the Byrd-Hagel resolution, though passed unanimously, left an out. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a treaty advocate, persuaded Mr. Byrd to state on the Senate floor that he did not demand that developing countries take on the same obligations as the developed world. In Kyoto, lobbyists from both sides said as the talks continued that the issue most likely to block a compromise was the question of what role developing countries should play in controlling global warming. An important component of the industry's success was its early decision to get organized labor involved. When the climate task force of the National Association of Manufacturers met earlier this year to map out a strategy for broadening opposition to a new treaty, it decided to look to the labor movement. The most obvious ally for industry was the United Mine Workers of America. Coal miners hold just 80,000 jobs in the United States, a number that is shrinking even faster than emissions of greenhouse gases are rising. But because coal gives off more carbon dioxide than any other fuel, a treaty to limit emissions of greenhouse gases would hit that union hardest. And coal miners' clout in the ranks of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. is far disproportionate to their share of the working population. Richard L. Trumka, a former United Mine Workers president and now the secretary-treasurer of the labor federation, has played a major role in presenting the coal miners' case on behalf of all labor. The labor federation's stance carries special weight these days, after its recent defeat of the Clinton Administration on trade policy. Mr. Trumka used blunt words when he spelled out for the White House the views of the labor movement on the climate change talks. If some countries are exempt from the emission-control targets in the treaty, he said, ''We think our Government negotiators need to be prepared to walk away from Kyoto without a treaty in hand.''

Many of the believers in global warming were in Kyoto, Japan, last week. Many of the skeptics were on line. As the nations of the world gathered to figure out how to save the planet from the various ills attributed to man-made greenhouse gases, environmental doubters were trying to figure how to convince people that all the concern is a lot of, well, hot air. And like many other contrarians these days, the foes of environmental correctness have made a home on the Internet. Judging by all the furious debunking going on in cyberspace last week, there are more than a few people who think that most environmental regulation, Vice President Al Gore's claims to environmental credentials, and the Rio Declaration on global warming are little more than symptoms of a global hysteria that could bring down the global economy. Following the Rio Declaration, agreed to in a sultry climate, the foes of environmental correctness chose to issue their own global warming manifesto from a cooler clime -- Leipzig, Germany. The 1995 Leipzig Declaration is a cornerstone of the World Wide Web site run by the Science and Environmental Policy Project, which is a project of S. Fred Singer, ''one of the nation's pre-eminent authorities on energy and environmental issues,'' and a staff member at the Environmental Protection Agency during Richard M. Nixon's first Administration. Like most of the anti-green material on line, the declaration contends that global warming is not really happening, but that if it is, it's not such a bad thing anyway.''Historically, climate has always been a factor in human affairs,'' it says, ''with warmer periods, such as the medieval 'climate optimum,' playing an important role in economic expansion and in the welfare of nations that depend primarily on agriculture. Colder periods have caused crop failures, and led to famines, disease and other documented human misery.''The site reports that the latest signers of this declaration were a group of television weather forecasters. They could presumably have been among those worried that, as reported at the Web site of Citizens for a Sound Economy, roughly 4.9 million jobs could be jeopardized by regulatory measures being considered to curb global warming. But there is no need to go hunting for obscure network addresses to find environmental skeptics on line. Take Globalwarming. org, for instance, the easily remembered address for the Web page run by the Cooler Heads Coalition. The Cooler Heads are members of a group established by the National Consumer Coalition, which is backed by a panoply of conservative and libertarian advocacy groups. Tucked among the Cooler Heads' wealth of information are suggestions from a book called ''Facts, Not Fear'' on how to educate children about the environment.''Explain to them that at the time dinosaurs lived, the atmosphere had CO2  levels that were at least five times greater than what we now have,'' the site says, using the scientific shorthand for carbon dioxide, the gas some scientists say helps cause global warming, ''and that these high levels of CO2  contributed to the rich vegetation.''Serious science is also the theme at the Web site of the Advancement of Sound Science Coalition, called the Junk Science Home Page. The motto of the page is ''All the junk that's fit to debunk,'' and it includes an essay that reads:''As far as agriculture is concerned, a modest warming is bound to be beneficial for several reasons. The increase would register largely as warmer nighttime and winter temperatures, leading to fewer frosts and longer growing seasons, while increased CO2  will stimulate plant growth and lessen the plants' need for water.''The site is also running a $1,000 lottery for those who send E-mail to President Clinton about global warming. But the site cautions that ''if the President signs a global warming treaty, you'll need the cash to pay the new energy tax.''The tone is only slightly more partisan at the Web site for World Climate Report, ''the nation's leading publication covering the breaking news concerning the science and political science of global climate change.''One of the pressing political science questions featured at this site is whether the Republicans can retake the White House on a platform that includes ''No Car-bon Tax.''The Web site does disclose that the report is financed by the Western Fuels Association, which ''promotes the importance of cheap electricity -- coal-fired electricity -- to the U.S. economy and its role in air quality improvements.''But perhaps the most sophisticated voice on global warming in the energy industry remains that of the Mobil Corporation, home of newspaper Op-Ed page advertisements across the country. In between ads for Mobil Masterpiece Theater and the Mobil Pegasus Prize for Literature (which was last awarded, coincidentally enough, for a book titled ''A God Strolling in the Cool of the Evening''), the company advocates a cautious approach to environmental regulation.''At Mobil, we do have a point of view on global climate change as well as views on many other issues,'' the site reads. ''And we know they are not always the most popular. But we like the public to know where we stand.''

Vice President Al Gore arrived here today hoping to ''generate some momentum'' in talks on what to do about global warming, and immediately said he had told the American delegation ''to show increased negotiating flexibility.''Even as Mr. Gore signaled that the United States might make some compromises, however, he indicated that it remained committed to its original position on reducing rich countries' emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases.''We came to Kyoto to find new ways to bridge our differences,'' Mr. Gore told a high-level gathering of ministers from more than 150 countries as they opened the decisive three-day session of the Kyoto talks. But in so doing, he said, ''we must not waver in our resolve.''The United States, he continued, ''remains firmly committed to a strong, binding target that will reduce our own emissions by nearly 30 percent from what they would otherwise be -- a commitment as strong, or stronger, than any we have heard here from any country.''The Administration has said previously that it would achieve the 30 percent reduction by cutting its emissions of greenhouse gases back to 1990 levels between 2008 and 2112. That is the target it proposes for all industrialized countries. Environmentalists and European delegates say that target is too low, while representatives of the fossil-fuel industry say it is too aggressive. The Vice President extended an olive branch to the developing countries, who have resisted the United States' entreaties to commit themselves to some sort of new emissions-control action. ''We understand that your first priority is to lift your citizens from the poverty so many endure and build strong economies that will assure a better future,'' he said. ''This is your right; it will not be denied.''But he reiterated the American desire that developing countries and rich ones participate in joint efforts to reduce emissions in the poorer nations. Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, said that Mr. Gore had a ''prime opportunity'' to ''make a strong case for why all the nations of the world must be included in any agreement,'' but that ''instead of asking for binding commitments from developing nations, he offered grand rhetoric on global understandings.''What form new American flexibility might take, should it develop, was unclear. Mr. Gore linked it to the adoption of a broad framework encompassing both market mechanisms to reduce emissions and the ''meaningful participation of key developing countries.''Senator John H. Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, said the call for flexibility did not necessarily mean that the United States would change its position on targets and timetables for emissions reduction, and that there were other areas of possible compromise. One, said Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, might be the number of greenhouse gases included in an agreement. Senator Lieberman called the speech ''an important statement that could break the ice jam and result in a major agreement.''Some environmentalists also portrayed the speech as a breakthrough.  ''At the eleventh hour, the Vice President's statement has given us some cause for hope,'' said John Adams, executive director of the Natural Resources Defense Council. Fred Krupp, executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund, said the speech ''provided the key to unlocking the global gridlock which has paralyzed the negotiation process.''Other environmentalists were not so positive. Greenpeace expressed ''extreme disappointment at the speech's failure to commit the U.S. to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions.''Representatives of the fossil-fuel and energy-intensive industries like the auto makers were cool to the speech. William F. O'Keefe, chairman of the Global Climate Coalition, an industry group, said the reference to flexibility ''suggests that the delegation is willing to go beyond the President's policy. I think that only means greater trouble for the economy.''As the Vice President spoke, perhaps 48 hours remained in which to forge an agreement. While differences had narrowed on some major issues, none were settled. Two big areas of concern are under discussion. One is the extent to which industrialized countries should reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, and on what schedule. The other is the question of the near-term role of developing countries in helping solve the problem. With the endgame under way, many participants in the talks believed, a settlement was within reach on the question of the rich countries' commitments. The European Union has proposed cutting emissions of the three principal greenhouse gases -- carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide -- 15 percent below 1990 levels by 2010. Japan has proposed cuts ranging from 2.5 percent to 5 percent below 1990 levels for the same three gases. The United States favors cutting average emissions for the period 2008 through 2112 back to 1990 levels, but it would include three other greenhouse gases: hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexachloride. All six gases trap heat in the atmosphere, although carbon dioxide is by far the most important. The combined effect of the gases, many scientists say, will raise the average global temperature by 2 to 6 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100 if emissions are not reduced. This, say the scientists, would cause the oceans to rise, rains to become heavier, floods, droughts and heat waves to become worse, ecological and agricultural zones to shift northward and growing seasons to become longer in northern climes like those of Canada and Russia. The European Union also proposes that its member countries be allowed to meet a unionwide cut of 15 percent by requiring some member countries to make deeper cuts while allowing the emissions of others to grow.

President Clinton telephoned the leaders of Argentina, Brazil, the Philippines and Tanzania on Sunday  to press for a new treaty to fight  global warming, the White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, said today. The four nations are either  playing instrumental roles in the treaty talks, in Kyoto, Japan, or are viewed as being friendly to the American position. The 166 nations at the talks are trying to complete negotiations by Wednesday in the face of disagreements among industrialized nations over how fast to curtail emissions of heat-trapping gases, and differences with developing nations over what their role should be. Tanzania's delegate at Kyoto is the leader of a coalition of developing nations that has been balking at accepting any new role for them. Brazil's delegation at the talks has been working for a proposal for a new international agency that would encourage developing nations to curb their emissions by arranging pollution reduction ''credits'' that could be sold between nations. Argentina, which holds the chair at the conference, also has expressed support for a role for developing nations. And the Philippines has long been a close ally of the United States. Without elaborating, Mr. McCurry called the weekend phone calls ''good conversations in each case, designed to clearly talk to some leaders of developing nations about some of the things we're trying to achieve in Kyoto.''

INTERNATIONALA3-16For Gore, Climate Meeting Is a Delicate Balancing Act  Vice President Al Gore, in Kyoto, Japan, for an international meeting on global warming, found himself navigating between competing constituencies of business groups and environmentalists, all of whom he may need in his quest for the Democratic nomination in 2000. A3Clinton Meets China Dissident  Wei Jingsheng, the prominent dissident recently released from a Chinese prison, met with President Clinton in the White House and urged him to continue pressing Beijing to improve its record on human rights and democracy. Mr. Clinton, who had requested the meeting, declined to comment on his conversation with Mr. Wei, who had spent almost 18 years in prison for writing an essay advocating democracy. A12Vitriol Flies Around China Book  Doubts about the authenticity of ''The City of Light,'' a book said to be a translation of one written in the 13th century and relating the experiences of an Italian Jewish merchant in China, have blossomed into growing invective. The writer, a Briton who lives in Italy, insists he translated the book from a manuscript he was allowed to read only on condition that he not show the original or reveal the owner's identity. A9Case for a Global Prosecutor  Louise Arbour of Canada, the chief prosecutor for the United Nations war crimes tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda, argued that a powerful, independent prosecutor would be crucial to the success of a permanent international criminal court. The United States fears that such a system could lead to criminal proceedings being pursued against American soldiers abroad. A8Swiss Sanctions May Be Eased  State and local government officials in New York and California called for temporarily easing sanctions they have imposed on Swiss banks in an effort to get the banks to turn over assets to the heirs of Holocaust victims. They also recommended a moratorium on new sanctions until at least April 1. Holocaust survivors were critical. A8New Welfare Tactics in Britain  Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain announced the creation of an advisory unit that will try to focus Government efforts on the poorest members of society. The move was an effort to convince doubters that pushing for spending restraints and tougher welfare standards will not mean that the disadvantaged will be ignored. A6Islamic Leaders Meet in Iran  Leaders representing the world's Muslims went to Iran for a conference that Iran contends is evidence that it has overcome American efforts to isolate it. The gathering, the largest in Iran since the 1979 revolution that overthrew an American ally, Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, is expected to condemn Israel for ''reinstating an atmosphere of war'' in the Middle East. A16NATIONALA18-27With Heroism Questioned, Remains to Be Exhumed  The widow of M. Larry Lawrence decided to have his remains exhumed from Arlington National Cemetery in the face of mounting evidence that the former ambassador to Switzerland had fabricated a heroic World War II record. In a letter to President Clinton, the widow said she had decided to bring her husband's remains ''home to San Diego for interment near friends and family who love him.'' Just hours before her letter was received at the White House, Wilbur Wright College in Chicago confirmed that Mr. Lawrence was enrolled as a full-time student there in March 1945. That was when Mr. Lawrence said he was serving in the United States merchant marine. A1Reno and Freeh Defy Panel  Attorney General Janet Reno and the F.B.I. Director Louis J. Freeh defied a House committee, refusing in an unusual joint letter to comply with a subpoena to turn over a memorandum written by Mr. Freeh two weeks ago that had urged her to allow an independent prosecutor to investigate campaign fund-raising. The internal memorandum reportedly contains confidential grand jury testimony about a pending inquiry. A1Nominee Still Has a Chance  Clinton Administration officials said that if Senate Republicans continued to block the nomination of Bill Lann Lee to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, the President would appoint him while the Senate is in recess. A1G.O.P. Losing Hispanic Support  The California Republican Party is losing ground among the fastest growing group in the electorate of the nation's biggest state, Hispanic voters. By 2000, Hispanic residents are expected to comprise nearly 30 percent of the voting-age population. Republicans have been burned by a backlash against Gov. Pete Wilson's strong stands against illegal immigration and affirmative action. The national implications for the party are also sobering, both because of California's electoral importance and because of growing Hispanic populations across the nation. A1A Debate on Mental Illness  If they present a psychiatric defense for the man accused of being the Unabomber, Theodore J. Kaczynski, his lawyers may reopen a debate over when to hold people who claim mental illness criminally responsible, some experts say. Some of the authorities say the case is already providing ammunition for people on both sides of the debate about the place of mental-illness testimony in court. A18Hot Line for Homeless  Expecting a colder winter than usual, the Department of Housing and Urban Development announced the creation of a toll-free telephone number to summon aid for homeless people who do not have food and shelter.  Department officials said the number would also be used to encourage more Americans to help solve problems that lead to the deaths of homeless people because of exposure. ''This is literally a matter of life and death,'' said Andrew M. Cuomo, the Housing Secretary. A18NEW YORK/REGIONB1-11Governor Announces New Transit Fare PlanGov. George E. Pataki announced a program of monthly, weekly and daily passes that will give mass transit users unlimited trips for a fixed price, in a dramatic move intended to transform the travel habits of New York City's subway and bus riders, The passes, which will cost $63 for a month, $17 for a week or $4 for a day, are priced to give the biggest breaks to people who use the system for more than just a five-day-a-week commute: workers who hold two jobs, parents who take their children to school and then go to work, people who go out at night. A1Board Gives Version of Crash  The National Transportation Safety Board showed video animations of  the last moments of Trans World Airlines Flight 800 and painted a picture with significantly different details from the one laid out by the C.I.A. two weeks ago. The safety board also offered more detail on why the board does not believe a missile or bomb was involved in the crash off the coast of Long Island last year, in which all 230 people on board died. B4Wall Still a Hazard  Part of Madison Avenue remained cordoned off as city workers carefully continued efforts to repair an office building wall that had peeled off on Sunday, rained debris and spilled a ton of bricks into a torn safety net.  Gaston Silva, the city's Commissioner of Buildings, said the wall was still unstable and would require an all-night effort to insert a steel support beam in its side. B3SPORTSC1-8HEALTHF9FASHIONB14SCIENCE TIMESF1-10Migration Effort Questioned  Several tangles between birds and the ultralight planes leading them on migratory flights have raised questions about a plan to use these fragile  aircraft to start a new migratory flock of rare whooping cranes by the end of the century. F1BUSINESS DAYD1-25Criticism of Oxford Grows  A growing number of regulators, investors, doctors and consultants are beginning to conclude that Oxford Health Plans Inc. was too quick to blame its computer system for delays in paying doctors and hospitals hundreds of millions of dollars. Critics say that Oxford has more serious problems: a poor grasp of how much it costs to deliver the care it promises and poor crisis management. D1Friendly Takeover in Korea  The Ssangyong Group, one of Korea's biggest family-run businesses, sold off its automobile company to the rival Daewoo Group in what executives described as the first friendly takeover in the history of Korea's largest conglomerates. D1Business DigestD1ARTSE1-14BBC to Come to America  The British Broadcasting Corporation will start a commercially supported cable channel in the United States next year to bring its dramas, comedies, documentaries and World News service directly into American homes for the first time. E1OBITUARIESB15Barry S. Brook  The internationally renowned musicologist, who established and led a doctoral program in music at the City University of New York Graduate School, was 79. B15EDITORIALA28-29Editorials: The bomb and the button; Mr. Pataki's fair fares; Sprewell's punishment fits; don't gamble with Governors Island. Columns: Russell Baker, Frank Rich, A. M. Rosenthal. ChessF7CrosswordE14ChronicleB16WeatherB12

Negotiators from around the world agreed today on a package of measures that for the first time would legally obligate industrial countries to cut emissions of waste industrial gases that scientists say are warming the earth's atmosphere. But details on one contentious issue -- the possible trade or sale of emission permits between countries -- remain unsettled, and may remain unsettled for months, and the United States has said it wants this issue resolved before it signs the treaty. Any treaty is subject to approval by the United States Senate. The agreement reached by delegates from more than 150 nations creates a landmark environmental policy to deal with global warming, and innovative new mechanisms to carry it out. The nations would have a year to ratify the treaty, starting next March. Talks on ''trading'' of emissions are expected to take place next November. Despite the uncertainties, some environmentalists hailed the agreement as a remarkable political and economic innovation, in that it would establish a global system for dealing with what many scientists believe is the overarching environmental concern. Opponents of the treaty condemned it as economically ruinous. The accord -- known as the Kyoto Protocol -- would require the industrial nations to reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and five other heat-trapping greenhouse gases to 5.2 percent below those of 1990. The United States would be required to cut emissions 7 percent below 1990 levels, on average, in the years from 2008 through 2012. The agreement appears to represent a significant concession by the United States, which previously had insisted on the less stringent course of reducing the emissions to 1990 levels, not below them. It is also a measure of the flexibility in the American bargaining position that Vice President Al Gore said he had ordered negotiators to adopt on a visit here Monday. It remains to be seen, however, whether the White House can persuade the Senate to accept the agreement, or even whether the United States will sign it. Many Senators had already expressed reservations about the less stringent Administration proposal. By 2000, emissions of greenhouse gases by the United States are expected to be about 13 percent higher than they were in 1990. They are expected to be perhaps 30 percent higher in 2010, if trends in energy use continue and no other action is taken. Senator Chuck Hagel, a Nebraska Republican observing the talks, said here today, ''Any way you measure this, this is a very bad deal for America.'' He predicted the Senate would not approve it. For his part Stuart Eizenstat, the senior American negotiator, said the United States was still waiting for more signs of flexibility from developing nations on the question of emission trading.''We do not yet have that meaningful commitment coming out of Kyoto,'' he said. But, he added, the possibilities for such a commitment ''are certainly pregnant.''President Clinton, visiting New York, said in a statement that he was ''very pleased'' by the agreement, which he said was ''environmentally strong and economically sound.'' But he said developing nations had to do more. And in Washington, Vice President Gore called the agreement a ''vital turning point.'' He added, ''Clearly, more work is needed. In particular we will continue to press for meaningful participation by key developing nations. We are confident that can be achieved. ''Under the accord, different countries would be assigned different targets, depending on their national circumstances and economic profiles.  The European Union's target was set at a reduction in emissions of 8 percent below 1990 levels, and that of Japan at 6 percent. Other targets, albeit within a narrow range, also applied to other developed countries. Some countries may be allowed to increase emissions, but globally, emissions are to be reduced by 30 percent from the levels currently projected for 2010. After an all-night session that ran into an unscheduled 11th day of discussion, the protocol was approved by representatives of more than 150 countries. The countries were modifying an agreement, negotiated in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, that called for voluntary efforts to limit emission of greenhouse gases. The burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil is responsible for most emissions of carbon dioxide, the most important greenhouse gas. As a means of promoting reductions in developing countries, the delegates established a special mechanism for transferring energy-efficient technologies and nonpolluting forms of energy production from richer nations to poorer ones. Greater efficiency means fewer emissions, and alternative energy sources like solar and wind power mean none. The Clean Development Mechanism, as the new arrangement was named, is intended to encourage companies in industrial countries to invest in emissions-reduction projects in developing countries -- modern, fuel-efficient power plants, for example -- and get some credit for reducing their own emissions. But the agreement was held up for hours last night and this morning by the resistance of some developing countries, including China, India and Saudi Arabia, to the inclusion of a provision enabling the industrialized nations to trade or purchase emissions rights. The United States considers this arrangement the cheapest and most efficient way of cutting emissions. Without it, American negotiators said, it would be impossible for the country to meet its emission targets. In emissions trading, a country or industrial company will be able to meet its emissions reduction target by cutting some of its emissions itself, while at the same time purchasing part of its required reduction from another country or company that achieved excess cuts. Based on its success with trading emissions of sulfur dioxide, a chemical implicated in acid rain, the United States argues that larger and cheaper reductions can be achieved with this mechanism. The objectors said that the mechanism could lead to shifting the burden to less developed countries, and that countries and companies might be able to buy their way out of their obligations. After hours of argument, delegates agreed to allow the parties to the 1992 treaty to postpone negotiations on the principles, rules, guidelines and operations of the trading system until November. Experts advising the negotiators here say that if emissions are not reduced, the average surface temperature of the globe will rise by 2 to 6 degrees Fahrenheit over the next century, causing widespread climatic, environmental and economic disruption. Philip E. Clapp, president of the the National Environmental Trust in Washington, who has been observing the talks here, called the agreement ''a historic landmark in environmental protection.'' He said it would be remembered ''as a central achievement of the Clinton-Gore Administration.''But representatives of the American fossil fuel and heavy manufacturing industries saw disaster in the agreement.''It is a terrible deal and the President should not sign it,'' said William K. O'Keefe, chairman of the Global Climate Coalition, an industry group.  Mr. O'Keefe said that ''business, labor and agriculture will campaign hard and will defeat'' the treaty if it is submitted to the Senate for ratification. The protocol is generally viewed only as an early step in a continuing attempt to deal with the question of climate change. It is generally acknowledged that any attempt to deal with the problem requires a global solution involving all countries.

In the end, Bill Clinton and Al Gore could not walk away. They faced unpleasant political options as talks in Kyoto, Japan, wound done, and as more than 150 nations neared agreement on a treaty to cut the emissions that lead to global warming. Under the agreement that emerged, which the Administration plans to sign, the United States will have to take more drastic steps than the White House had hoped to cut greenhouse emissions. Heavy industry, from cars to coal to steel to electricity, has already joined with organized labor to fight the proposal. But walking away from the treaty -- as Mr. Gore said he was willing to do last week -- would have enraged the environmentalists who are key constituents for him and Mr. Clinton. It would have isolated the United States -- which just refused to sign a treaty banning land mines -- as the leading emitter of greenhouse gasses and the only industrial nation unwilling to address the problem jointly. And it would have been contrary, their aides said, to a belief shared by the President and Vice President that global warming presents grave dangers. But now the Administration has a larger fight on its hands, a fight that will help define not only budget negotiations next year but the 1998 Congressional elections and even the next Presidential race. Even before the treaty was worked out, Democratic allies of the Administration were warning the White House not to seek approval in the Senate. ''What we have here is not ratifiable in the Senate in my judgment,'' Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said in a telephone news conference from Kyoto. Before the Kyoto meeting began, the Senate voted 95 to 0 to pass a resolution that the United States would not agree to a treaty that did not provide a role in cutting emissions for developing nations. That became a negotiating goal for the Administration. In Kyoto, Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, said flatly, ''There is no way, if the President signs this, that the vote in the United States Senate will even be close. We will kill this bill.''The treaty emerging in Kyoto tonight (Thursday morning, Kyoto time) includes a new program sought by the Administration to funnel capital and environmentally friendly technology to developing nations. But White House aides said that, while they considered the provision a victory, it was not strong enough to win ratification. The White House is also planning to propose tax incentives to encourage cuts in greenhouse-gas emission as part of its budget proposal next year, but that, too, will be subject to Congessional approval. Two officials said that, judging by the early criticism, the public would get a positive impression of the Administration's actions. ''We figured that we would probably be criticized by both industry and environmental groups,'' one of them said, ''which has the effect of saying, 'Well, they must have ended up in a place that's pretty sensible.' ''Indeed, in Kyoto, one industry coalition went as far as to issue a statement denouncing the agreement hours before the deal was final. And the World Wildlife Fund attacked the plan, saying that the outcome was ''a flawed agreement that will allow major polluters to continue emitting greenhouse gasses through loopholes.''But Fred Krupp, executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund, said: ''There's still much more work to be done to assure that the protocol's targets are met'' but ''Vice President Gore should be commended for coming to Japan and opening the doors to an agreement.''In recent polls the public has expressed solid support for action on global warming. Two weeks ago, in a poll taken by The New York Times , 65 percent said that the United States should take steps now to cut its own emissions ''regardless of what other countries do.'' Only 17 percent agreed that cutting emissions ''will cost too much money and hurt the U.S. economy.''Four years ago, Mr. Clinton promised to reduce United States emissions to their 1990 levels by the year 2000. But such emissions are now more than 10 percent above 1990 levels and rising. Mr. Clinton rarely mentioned the issue until early this summer, when, in anticipation of the Kyoto meeting, he began warning of the dangers of global warming. But, even as he began addressing the subject again, Mr. Clinton has repeatedly said that the United States can meet what amount to rigorous emissions targets with little or no economic pain.''I am convinced that we can demonstrate to the American people that we can substantially reduce our greenhouse gas emissions and fulfill our global environmental responsibilities as well as our responsibilities to our own people without giving up economic growth,'' Mr. Clinton said in an interview with The New York Times last Thursday. ''But it will require a very disciplined, organized, coordinated effort to do it.''

For the United States to meet the promises agreed to at the global warming conference in Japan, Americans would have to make significant, sustained cuts in their use of fossil fuels, beginning immediately and lasting well into the next century. The nation's consumption of coal and oil would have to decline by as much as 30 percent from the levels now projected for 10 or 15 years from now, marking the first step toward what proponents of the treaty say would be a radical restructuring of the economy's patterns of energy use later in the 21st century. In the short term, it would require car makers to sell more efficient vehicles, power companies to give up coal and people to learn to be miserly when choosing light bulbs, air-conditioners and appliances. In the long term there could be a wholesale turn to novel devices like combustion-free fuel cells and solar and wind power.  Economists and advocates may dispute whether the economy would be better or worse off as a result, but it would have to be markedly different. The country has made no sacrifices remotely like this since the oil shocks of the 1970's. At the moment, the American appetite for fossil fuels, and therefore emissions of heat-trapping carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, is growing. Last month the Energy Department reckoned in its long-term forecast that this trend, fed by cheap fuel and strong economic growth, was likely to continue for decades. So as exhausted delegates straggle home from rancorous all-night talks in Kyoto, the question is whether the United States -- where per capita emissions of carbon dioxide are more than double Japan's, triple France's and 10 times Brazil's -- has the economic strength, the brainpower and the political will to put into practice what its negotiators have promised. The least of the problems is technology. Although expensive, substitutes for carbon fuels are already available. But the political barriers look formidable. Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader, called the treaty's prospects bleak even before the ink was dry, and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a Democrat who favors the treaty, cautioned against rushing to seek Senate approval. Not only would the Senate have to consent to the treaty, but both houses of Congress would have to approve any legislation to carry it out, like emissions caps, a permit-trading plan, tax incentives, research budgets or reorganization of the utility industry. As for enforcing a national energy diet, no one knows what combination of rewards and punishments might be needed to change course and head toward the targets that would be imposed under the new regime. The Energy Department has projected that emissions of carbon from energy use will rise 1.2 percent a year until 2020. Between 2008 and 2012, when the treaty calls for reductions to be achieved, emissions are headed toward 1.8 billion metric tons a year, the agency said. The new goal under the treaty would be 1.25 billion tons during the same period. Only a small part of the reduction -- at most 160 million tons a year, American negotiators say -- might be achieved by trading credits with Russia, whose emissions dropped sharply when its economic output collapsed along with Communism. To meet these goals, most analysts say governments would have to put caps on emissions. But the Clinton Administration favors market-based mechanisms like trading pollution permits, rather than rigid regulations, to let companies decide for themselves how to meet the limits.''President Clinton is right that getting to anything below 1990 levels in the U.S. is going to be a big stretch,'' said Christopher Flavin, an energy efficiency expert at the Worldwatch Institute, an environmental group. ''Even if we are partly to buy our way there with credits from Russia, there is still going to have to be a lot done at home.''Opponents of the treaty agreed with that assessment.''The energy use curbs needed to comply with the climate treaty are far deeper than expected,'' said the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a pro-business research and advocacy group. It said provisions to allow international emissions trading and other offsets would only ''disguise the pain.''But there are several approaches, some buried in the treaty text and others being developed by the Clinton Administration as unilateral actions, that might help. For example, the treaty makes allowances for trading pollution control credits among countries if that would provide cheaper ways of reducing worldwide emissions for what is, after all, a global problem. The treaty also would allow countries to receive credit for certain changes in land use and forestry practices against their emissions limit, on the ground that trees take in carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as they grow and store the carbon for decades in the form of wood. The Clinton Administration is working on a package of tax incentives and research subsidies that would accelerate the introduction of renewable energy sources like solar and wind power, which do not emit carbon, and energy-efficiency technologies that use far less fossil fuels. The American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy and other conservation advocates have called for tax incentives for any vehicle, whether a compact car or a lumbering sport utility vehicle, that achieved double the fuel efficiency of today's comparable models. Any car could double its fuel efficiency by using hybrid gas-and-electric technologies that are just coming onto the market. Another crucial opportunity for reducing fossil fuel consumption may come with the opening of the electric utility industry to nationwide competition.

In a corner of the tiled tunnel leading from a subway stop to the Kyoto International Conference Hall, the kindergarten children of Kyoto left a message for delegates to the climate conference here this week. Their message was an assemblage of miniature trees and flowers accompanied by a small sign. ''The Kyoto people are praying for the success of this conference,'' the sign said. ''The future of all people, especially the children, depends largely on the outcome of this conference.''But even if it is ultimately ratified,  the agreement to cut emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases that emerged today from 10 days of high-stakes politicking will not secure those children, or their children,  from the climatic disruptions that mainstream scientists say lie ahead.  Participating countries could obey its emission limits to the letter, and atmospheric levels of the gases, produced chiefly by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil, would continue to rise. The Kyoto Protocol does make a start, however. It would establish at least the foundation of an institutional framework and accompanying mechanisms for dealing with the problem in coming decades. And it  signals business and industry that the issue is here to stay, that the ways in which energy is produced and used must change, and that these issues should be taken into consideration in planning and investing for the long term. The burning of coal, oil and natural gas, the energy mainstays of the modern economy, produces waste carbon dioxide that remains in the atmosphere, trapping heat. If nothing is done to limit emission of these gases, scientists advising the delegates here say, the earth's average surface temperature will rise by 2 to 6 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100 if the world pursues business as usual. (By comparison, the world is now only 5 to 9 degrees warmer than in the depths of the last ice age.) The scientists say this much warming would bring rising seas, more severe droughts, rainstorms, heat waves and floods, together with broad shifts in climatic and agricultural zones that would benefit some regions but seriously harm others. The Kyoto Protocol legally binds industrialized countries to cut their greenhouse emissions, collectively, by an annual average of about 5 percent below 1990 levels for the period 2008 through 2012 -- a 30 percent reduction below what they would otherwise be. Some are to cut more than that, some less, and a few will be allowed to let their emissions grow because of special circumstances. Among the industrialized big three, the United States must reduce its emissions 7 percent below 1990 levels, the 15-nation European Union 8 percent and Japan 6 percent. But even if the countries adopt and adhere to these standards, an uncertain prospect, they will only be slowing the accumulation of heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere. As a result, many experts believe that it may already be too late to avoid serious climatic disruption, that the task ahead is one of keeping it from becoming truly catastrophic. Although there are dissenters, many scientists now predict that unless far more drastic action is taken, atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide, the major contributor to climate change, will double sometime late in the next century from the pre-industrial levels of the late 18th century. Atmospheric levels of cardon dioxide are now about 360 parts per million, and many experts say it will be difficult, if not impossible, to stabilize them at 550 parts per million, close to a doubling of pre-industrial concentrations. Though it is difficult to predict exactly what climate changes would result from such a doubling, there is wide agreement that they would be highly disruptive. Predictably, the fossil fuel industry warned that the Kyoto cuts would bring economic pain, while some environmentalists said they did not go far enough. Other environmentalists and many business interests hailed the protocol as a solid agreement that would make the economy more  efficient and boost growth in the long term. Only time will tell who is right. What seems clearer is that ordinary Americans will notice little immediate impact on their everyday lives. If it is able to win Senate approval of the agreement, the Clinton Administration intends to phase in domestic measures to meet the Kyoto target over time, starting with the provision of financial incentives, tax cuts and cooperative government-industry efforts to accelerate the use of energy-efficient technologies. After a decade or so of experience, according to the Clinton plan, the United States would inaugurate the centerpiece of its emissions-cutting strategy and a principle hard-won here: emissions trading. Under this arrangement, a cap would be set on permissible carbon-dioxide emissions. Companies that reduce their emissions more than required could sell the excess emissions, at a profit, to those that exceed the cap. The Administration argues that use of this mechanism for reducing industrial emissions of sulfur dioxide has shown that it achieves more emissions cuts at lower cost. But emissions trading emerged as one of the most contentious items here, almost torpedoing the talks. After a bitter 11th-hour debate, the developing nations agreed to an international trading mechanism for developed countries. But they fear that trading would allow rich countries to buy their way out of reduction obligations, so it remains to be seen whether they will agree to the regulations necessary to make it work. The issue will be debated in the next round of climate talks, scheduled to begin in Buenos Aires in November. Another innovative mechanism approved here is an international fund through which rich countries could invest in specific emissions-saving projects in developing countries. The two countries involved would share in the resulting emissions credits. Apart from that, the Kyoto agreement did little about the future involvement of developing countries. While everyone recognizes that their growing greenhouse emissions will ultimately require them to submit to binding limits, the poorer countries have refused to accept them until the richer countries show the way with action. The question remains a subject for future negotiations. Because the new protocol does so little about developing countries, it is unclear whether the Administration will sign it, and there are very grave doubts that the Senate would approve it. But President Clinton has said he will proceed with his domestic plans for emissions reduction in the meantime. Beyond that, the Kyoto Protocol is about the long term, and the United States could join it at any time in the years immediately ahead if conditions are right. The 10 days of sleepless negotiations may well have established a adjustable instrument that in coming decades can respond to emerging new knowledge about both the science and economics of the problem -- if the governments of the world buy into it seriously. Should they do so, the descendants of those Kyoto kindergartners and others like them throughout the world may have cause to be grateful. THE CLIMATE ACCORD: THE OUTLOOK

Korea Delays Bond Sale, Rattling World Markets  The crisis in South Korea worsened as the country's largest state-owned bank abruptly postponed an important bond sale, meaning that South Korea must come up with other ways to pay or renegotiate billions of dollars in debts coming due in the next few weeks. The delay of the $2 billion bond sale rattled financial markets around the world and raised the possibility that South Korea might become the first Asian nation to default on its debts since an economic crisis began in the region last summer. [Page A1. ]Asian Import Prices FallThe Asian financial crisis reduced the price of imports to this country from South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore by 1.2 percent in November. It was the sharpest drop since the Labor Department began keeping monthly records in 1992 and four times the average decline for August through October. Products from the four account for 11 percent of all imports to the United States. Another Government report said retail sales climbed a lackluster two-tenths of 1 percent. [D2. ]Bank Wins New Power on BondsA Salt Lake City bank, Zions Bancorporation, has won approval from Federal regulators to use a new system to underwrite municipal revenue bonds. The system allows national banks to establish or expand subsidiaries to market new products and services, which could include securities and insurance products. Zions's application could be the model for other banks to follow. [D2. ]Japan Bailout Plan Gains SupportPrime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto of Japan appears to have prevailed in winning over support in his party for a plan to raise 10 trillion yen to bolster the Japanese banking system. Opposition to the plan within the ruling Liberal Democratic Party faded after Mr. Hashimoto promised that none of the money would be used for a tax cut or some other stimulant that violated the party's pledge of fiscal austerity. [D4. ]Global Finance Trade Pact AdvancesNegotiators from more than 100 countries are trying to work out a global trade agreement to end barriers in banking, insurance and securities before the deadline Friday. Trade officials and business executives in Geneva predicted yesterday that the countries would reach a deal. [D5. ]Kyoto Accord's ImpactThe Kyoto agreement on controlling gases that contribute to global warming will, if approved by the Senate, have a sweeping impact on business and consumers. Solar and wind power and other alternative energies may become more cost-effective if fossil fuel prices rise sharply. [A16. ]Nasdaq Reins in Bulletin Board  The National Association of Securities Dealers moved to impose new rules on OTC Bulletin Board, the forum for the shares of almost 7,000 tiny companies. The Bulletin Board is also home to most of the stocks that have played starring roles in some highly publicized securities frauds in which investors have lost millions. Market Place. [D8. ]Safety Conference on Light TrucksMany vexing problems concerning the safety of sport utility vehicles, mini-vans and pickup trucks were discussed at a two-day meeting of nearly 200 auto industry engineers and regulators in Dearborn, Mich. [A1. ]KPMG Sues Consulting RivalKPMG Peat Marwick sued Stern Stewart & Company, contending that it was unfairly trying to stifle competition in a new area, economic value added management. [D2. ]

When he graduated from Cambridge in the mid-60's, John Browne did not want to become an academic, a civil servant or a diplomat, proper careers for a member of Britain's intellectual elite. Three decades later, Mr. Browne, 49, still recalls the reaction of one of his teachers to the career he did choose. It was ''amusing,'' the don remarked loudly, that young Browne wanted to become ''a captain of industry.''As chief executive of the British Petroleum Company Mr. Browne has indeed become a captain of industry and within the rarefied circles in which he travels, he is still a maverick of sorts. Under his leadership, British Petroleum, one of the world's biggest energy companies, has won grudging approval from some environmentalists, many of whom place his company at the forefront of multinationals willing to tackle the problem of global warming. Mr. Browne today was quick to praise what he described as the limited progress achieved at the Kyoto climate conference. In a statement issued at his London headquarters, he said he hoped that future agreements would go further.''We don't underestimate the amount of work which still needs to be done,'' he said, ''and we believe business has a constructive role to play in the process.''In a series of speeches, and in an interview earlier this week, he said that corporations needed to restrain emissions of carbon dioxide -- and he has taken concrete action to support his views, setting strict standards for B.P. refineries and factories, and investing $160 million in solar energy. He hopes solar power will generate a trillion dollars for the company in a decade. This has won Mr. Browne recognition in unlikely quarters. ''Compared to other oil companies, B.P. was the first major to come out in favor of policies to reduce CO2  emissions,'' said Chris Rose, deputy executive director of the environmental activist organization Greenpeace, in Britain. ''I guess you can say on a scale of good to bad, they, and the Shell Oil Company, are the good guys in this industry.''''I believe we've now come to an important moment in our consideration of the environment,'' he said in an interview in the company's stately board room in the financial district of London. In Mr. Browne's view, it is time for the business world to accept the realities of global warming, which he described as facts backed by ''effective consensus among the world's leading scientists and serious and well-informed people.''Rather than fight environmentalists, companies can save and eventually earn money if they begin to  make this ''investment in the future.''Contrast that with the Exxon Corporation, the world's No. 2 oil company behind Royal Dutch/Shell. In the 1980's it cleared out its portfolio of renewable energy projects, selling its solar unit in 1984. In Beijing earlier his month, Lee Raymond, Exxon's chairman, asserted that the link between burning of hydrocarbons and harm to the climate remained unproved. ''Many people, politicians and the public alike, believe global warming is a rock-solid certainty,'' Mr. Raymond said. ''But it's not.''For his part, Mr. Browne said: ''No one knows precisely what's going on, but its doesn't mean you do nothing. Our position is to continue to provide energy to the world but do it better.''Under Mr. Browne, B.P.'s market capitalization has increased from $35 billion in November 1994 to $81 billion today. Profits have increased from $2.3 billion to $ 4.1 billion in the same period. An engineer who has become a wizard in the art of finance, Mr. Browne is an opera buff. He compares a successful corporation to a well-performed opera. ''You have got to have a well-trained orchestra, a conductor who is sympathetic to the meaning of the music, a director who is sympathetic to the conductor and singers able to both sing and act,'' he said. ''So when it all comes together it is fantastic.''Puffing on a slim cigar (he says he is cutting down) and sipping coffee, Mr. Browne said B.P.'s foray into the business of pollution control was engaging the entire company.''We have an action plan in which 50,000 people participate,'' he said. The plan includes setting targets for each refinery, factory and outfit of the company around the world to use less energy, with fixed targets reviewed periodically. Special training in energy conservation has been set up for employees in scores of countries in which B.P. operates. The company has set a goal of eliminating the flaring of natural gas by repackaging it. Above all, B.P. has gone further than any other energy company in developing solar energy as a nonpolluting substitute, with factories producing solar panels in Spain, Australia and Saudi Arabia -- a dozen more factories are under consideration. ''We already have 10 percent of the market in solar energy,'' Mr. Browne said. Companies had better take action before someone else does it for them, he said, contending that he wanted to lead no one. It was simply, he said, that ''we in B.P. have reached that point.''INTERNATIONAL BRIEFS

There are two salient facts about Wednesday's agreement on global warming in Kyoto. The first is that it could lead to an environmental undertaking of historic scale. If the industrialized countries carry out in practice what they promised on paper, making sustained cuts in the use of fossil fuels, they will forever alter the way the world produces and consumes energy. The second fact is that Kyoto was merely the beginning of what is sure to be a brutal battle. Winning Senate approval means defeating the treaty's well-financed opponents in business and labor, and that in turn will require an extraordinary level of Presidential energy. Kyoto was the first test of President Clinton's political will. He passed it. When an agreement seemed to be slipping away, he and Vice President Gore instructed their negotiators to agree to deeper cuts in American emissions of carbon dioxide and five other heat-trapping gases than Washington had originally proposed. That concession enabled the Administration to win support, in principle, for innovative financial mechanisms that it regards as essential to the success of the entire enterprise. The President must now bring that same creativity and passion to the Senate struggle. It will be complicated by the fact that the industrialized nations failed to achieve the one thing the Senate most wanted, a commitment by developing nations like China to set targets and timetables of their own. The deadline for signing the treaty and sending it to the Senate is more than a year away, and Mr. Clinton says he will not do so until the developing countries come on board. He can also use that time to spell out in greater detail how he intends to reach the treaty's targets without provoking the huge economic dislocations forecast by its opponents. The treaty has two important features that will help him sell it. One provides in principle -- details will be worked out later -- for a system of ''emissions trading,'' under which a country or individual company would be able to meet its reduction target by buying reductions from another country or company that has reduced emissions below its targets, and thus has credits to sell. The second provision sets up a new multilateral organization that is intended to encourage companies in rich countries to invest in emissions-reduction projects in poorer countries. Both provisions could encourage cost-saving technologies and provide a ready source of capital to developing nations. There are already rumblings that Senate opponents will push quickly for a resolution declaring their opposition to the treaty. That would be outrageously irresponsible. The world has worked for more than two years to produce a serious answer to a potentially calamitous problem. For that reason alone, it deserves a measured, mature hearing.

To Scott Sklar, the executive director of the Solar Energy Industries Association, nothing could be better for business than an agreement on controlling gases that contribute to global warming. Already, the solar business is booming, and with tax and research subsidies its growth might go from 27 percent a year to 40 percent, he predicted, and the price of clean electricity from the sun could drop by 25 percent. In the niche of the economy that aims to replace coal, oil and other sources of carbon dioxide, the main gas implicated in global climate change, ''the United States could create 400,000 new jobs by 2010, equal to the largest U.S. corporate employer,'' he said. But Mary H. Novak, vice president of Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates, an economic consulting firm engaged by industry groups opposing the climate change treaty, says her forecasts predict job losses in the millions.''The coal mining industry in this country will be wiped out,'' she predicted. ''Agriculture, manufacturing and transportation will all be seriously affected. Farm incomes could be cut by as much as 50 percent.''Whoever is right, every American uses energy, almost everybody wastes it, and its price affects every product's costs. So nobody can escape the repercussions of the treaty that was emerging in Kyoto -- assuming that the binding new protocol is signed by the United States, after it is approved by the Senate. The Energy Department, in a study by five national labs, found that with aggressive research, new technologies aimed at meeting Kyoto's goals could be brought to market. But for many of them to be cost-effective, fossil fuel prices would have to rise the equivalent of 12.5 cents per gallon of gasoline to help stimulate most of the emissions savings the treaty envisions. Further price increases would bring even more exotic technologies into play. Wind power, for example, is getting more cost-effective and in some places is close to under-pricing fossil fuels, said Terry Peterson, manager of green power marketing at the Electric Power Research Institute, an organization financed by the energy industry.''The prospects of getting the costs down through a combination of further technology development and larger scales of production are very good,'' he said. But asking how much energy will cost in 10 or 15 years, or which technologies will win the race to replace coal, is like predicting the price of a cellular phone in the year 2010. Perhaps in the future all new schools will use geothermal heat pumps for cooling and heating, the way the new Choptank Elementary School in Cambridge, Md., did this year. The devices can cut greenhouse gas emissions by 40 percent compared with conventional technology, and Dorchester County, Md., expects to save $400,000 in energy and maintenance costs at the school in the next 20 years, according to a consortium of businesses that is pushing the technology. Perhaps the American Power Corporation, a Boston utility, and the Electric Power Research Institute of Palo Alto will achieve a breakthrough in the field tests they announced last week of a small fuel cell to produce electricity at home. Fuel cells cleanly and efficiently convert natural gas and other fuels to electricity. Their device is expected to cost $5,000 and is big enough to easily provide the energy needs of a typical household. More energy consumers and producers will make such novel choices, presumably, if the cost of fossil energy goes up in the next 10 or 15 years, when the treaty's terms would effectively put a lid on the nation's emissions of carbon dioxide. The auto industry would be profoundly affected, since gasoline consumption is the biggest single factor, and the fastest growing, in American emissions of carbon dioxide. And the industry might risk billions of dollars in losses if emissions are capped, because virtually all its profits come from making large sport utility vehicles and light trucks that use much more gas than cars. But even a big vehicle can be made more fuel-efficient. The Ford Motor Company predicted in a recent study for the Energy Department that it could make an electric van using fuel cell technology that would get 32 to 34 miles a gallon, more than twice the Econoline model's current performance. And the engine, the study said, could be mass-produced at a price competitive, if not quite on a par, with today's internal combustion engines. The other big source of carbon emissions is coal burned by electric utilities, which generate 56 percent of the nation's power that way. The Edison Electric Institute, an industry trade group that represents most of the private utilities in the nation, estimated in a study that it would cost the industry close to $30 billion to convert most of the coal burning capacity to plants that would produce power by burning natural gas, which would produce steam to drive turbines. THE CLIMATE ACCORD: THE IMPACT

The White House, beginning the arduous task of selling an accord to reduce emissions of climate-altering gases, said today that it would not submit the proposed treaty for Senate ratification until developing countries agree to participate in the global environmental effort. But developing countries at the global climate-change conference that just ended in Kyoto, Japan, said they would not act until they see the rich countries succeed in cutting their own emissions. And many members of the Senate are already saying it has no chance of passage. The accord is dependent on Senate approval. At the insistence of China and other developing countries, the Kyoto conference imposed no requirements on newly industrialized countries and created only limited mechanisms for their inclusion in global efforts to curb so-called greenhouse gases. The developing countries delayed a compromise that would have allowed the United States and other major polluters to buy or trade emission credits from countries whose emissions are within acceptable levels, and therefore avoid making significant cuts in emissions in a compressed time period. With Senators denouncing the accord as not tough enough on developing countries, the stage was set for a yearlong political fight with the Clinton Administration, which has embraced the outlines of the deal. The developing countries' objections provide Mr. Clinton with additional time to muster his arguments in favor of the treaty and an opportunity to portray himself as a defender of the United States' interests. For the next year -- an election year -- he is in the risk-free position of being able to make a strong pro-environmental political pitch while not having to face a damaging vote in the Senate. President Clinton defended the agreement as ''environmentally strong and economically sound,'' even as Administration officials were admitting that its flaws made it unacceptable to the Senate. Mr. Clinton is likely to either win credit for tackling a difficult problem or pay a huge political cost for misjudging the public's appetite for sacrifice, even if doled out in small portions over many years. The outcome of the debate and the political impact on Mr. Clinton and Vice President Gore are yet to be seen. But it is certain that Congress and the American people will be subjected to millions of dollars worth of lobbying and advertising in the next months by powerful coalitions that support and oppose the proposed treaty. Already, both sides are making sweeping claims about the dangers of global warming and the high cost of proposed solutions. Among the President's most difficult jobs will be to help the public decipher those assertions and bring pressure on Congress to take action on a matter over which there is still wide disagreement.''The game is afoot,'' a senior White House aide said today. In an appearance at a Coast Guard station in Miami, the President acknowledged that he faced the difficult political and diplomatic job of persuading the American people and leaders of developing countries that the threat of global warming is real and requires immediate action.''There's still a lot of challenges ahead,'' Mr. Clinton said. Even if the countries that agreed to the targets set in Kyoto begin taking steps to reduce so-called greenhouse gases that mainstream scientists believe are warming the earth's atmosphere, concentrations of these emissions will continue to rise for many years. Mr. Clinton and others say that a potential catastrophe in the next century will be averted only by concerted global action beginning now to cut emissions. Officials in Washington said the Administration would not put the treaty before the Senate before 1999 at the earliest, after a meeting in Buenos Aires late next year aimed at persuading developing countries to accept the Kyoto agreement's limitations on emissions of greenhouse gases. That timetable would also postpone some of the ratification debate beyond the 1998 Congressional midterm elections. President Clinton has until March 1999 to decide whether to sign the proposed agreement.''As we have said from the very beginning, we will not submit this for ratification until there's meaningful participation by key developing nations,'' Vice President Gore said at a Washington news conference today. Administration officials did not define ''meaningful participation,'' saying that it was a matter for months of bilateral and multilateral discussions. Mr. Gore added that the Administration had ruled out tax increases to meet the obligations of the treaty. And he said that the Administration would soon propose a $5 billion package of tax incentives and research grants to move the country onto a more energy-efficient path. One senior White House official, who insisted on anonymity, said it was possible that the treaty would not be ready for submission to the Senate during the remainder of Mr. Clinton's term in office. Despite the Administration's go-slow approach, domestic opponents of the accord continued to rail against its terms, saying that it meant colder homes, a shrinking economy and higher gasoline prices. The House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, said the United States ''surrendered'' to pressure in Kyoto and called the proposed treaty ''an outrage.'' He said the accord would cripple the American economy.''Early reports from those in attendance indicate that on 10 critical issues such as cuts in emissions, future developing country commitments and new U.S. commitments, we sacrificed the future well-being of the country based on environmental correctness and inconclusive science,'' Mr. Gingrich said. ''It is profoundly wrong that approximately 134 countries were allowed to vote on a treaty by which they will not be bound.''''Mr. President,'' the Speaker asked, ''is this putting America's interests first?''Senator James M. Inhofe, Republican of oil-rich Oklahoma, called the Kyoto accord ''a political, economic and national security fiasco'' that will never be ratified by the Senate in any form. Mr. Inhofe, in a news release, said that the failure to secure binding commitments from developing countries meant that the agreement fell far short of the standard set in a 95-to-0 Senate vote earlier this year. Among its flaws, he said, was the lack of an exemption for military vehicles and operations.''They went to Kyoto determined to get a treaty for its own sake, regardless of the content,'' Mr. Inhofe said. ''What they have come back with is scientifically dubious, economically disastrous and militarily stupid. Yet I don't doubt their determination to try to make it all politically saleable.''Indeed, that is the challenge facing the President and the Vice President as the debate over global warming moves into a new phase that will likely keep the issue before the public well into the 2000 Presidential campaign. Mr. Clinton insisted that the United States can make a start toward reducing its emissions without disrupting the economy or reducing the country's standard of living.''I see already the papers are full of people saying, 'The sky is falling, the sky is falling, it's a terrible thing,' '' Mr. Clinton said. ''Every time we've tried to improve the American environment in the last 25 or 30 years, somebody has predicted that it would wreck the economy. And the air is cleaner, the water is cleaner, the food supply is safer, there are fewer toxic waste dumps. And the last time I checked, we had the lowest unemployment rate in 24 years.''So don't believe the skeptics'' Mr. Clinton said. ''Give us a chance to make the case.''Congressional committees are preparing now for hearings next year on the Kyoto accord and the broader question of the severity of the peril of global warming and how to address it. Senator Richard Lugar, Republican of Indiana, the chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, said United States negotiators failed in Kyoto to achieve any of their major objectives and came home with a document that makes unacceptable demands on the domestic economy for questionable benefits. Mr. Lugar compared the climate negotiations with Mr. Clinton's defeat on ''fast-track'' trade negotiating authority, which the House last month rejected because a majority of Democrats did not believe the President's promises to insure environmental and labor protections in future trade agreements.''The President needs to spend some time explaining to the American people the validity of his arguments on global warming,'' Mr. Lugar said. ''He didn't make the case on fast track and he hasn't even begun to make the case on climate change. And now he has to explain how the U.S. negotiators botched it in Kyoto.''Mr. Gore, whose presidential ambitions will hinge in part on how the public perceives his role in the global warming debate, appeared mindful of the political risks of the coming months and made an effort to move the issue out of the partisan arena. In a White House news conference, the Vice President said: ''In the coming days and months, it will be critical that we avoid looking at this effort through a narrow political lens. Too much is at stake. We must focus instead on the longer-term future of our planet and our economy, and on the health and well-being of our families and communities.''This is not a Democratic or a Republican problem, nor is it a problem for any one nation alone,'' Mr. Gore continued. ''It is a problem for the entire world. The stakes are simply too high, environmentally, economically and morally, for us to allow the special interests to get in the way of the common interests of all mankind.''THE CLIMATE ACCORD: THE OVERVIEW

As the debate begins over the agreement to reduce global gas emissions, many Republicans sense that they have a political opportunity reminiscent of the health care fight of 1994. The country then supported the basic idea of health insurance for all, just as it now supports strong environmental action. But Republicans skewered the health plan on the details, and in the process painted President Clinton as a big-government liberal. Some now think they can repeat their success and this time tar Vice President Al Gore. Even if the Senate never ends up voting on the pact, Republicans are already testing arguments. Steve Forbes, a Republican Presidential contender, immediately called the accord ''an unprecedented government seizure of American freedom and sovereignty.'' He added that  ''the Clinton health care plan pales in comparison.''Jim Nicholson, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, said the pact will ''radically change the American life style.'' And Audrey Mullen, the executive director of the conservative group Americans for Tax Reform, said, ''Al Gore would prefer to stick working-class America with a big tax increase and stick America with lost jobs or seek the approval of his liberal environmentalist tree-hugging friends.''At the same time voices of caution in the party recognize that the Republicans have often fallen on the wrong side in the environmental debate and need to be very careful how they approach an issue on which Democrats have traditionally had a great public advantage. And some party members remember how ineffective President George Bush was when he went after Mr. Gore in 1992 on his environmental views, calling him ''Ozone Man.''''The Republican Party, as far as public perception is concerned, has not been a strong position to go toe to toe on the environment,'' said Tony Blankley, a former spokesman for Newt Gingrich, the Speaker of the House. He said that while he believed that the accord and the Vice President were vulnerable, it would require an extended, concerted effort to sway public opinion. The Republican opportunity is enhanced by division among the Democrats about the accord. It is supported by one core Democratic constituency -- environmentalists -- but has drawn significant opposition from the labor movement. This may be an issue where many Congressional Democrats stand back and let the Administration and the Republicans fight. Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, who is considered a likely challenger to Mr. Gore in 2000, has been conspicuously silent about the agreement. His aides said he wanted to consult with members of his caucus. The Democratic delegation he sent to observe the Kyoto negotiations on global warming was split in its views. The Administration does not expect to move forward to seek Senate approval until 1999 at the earliest. That means that there is plenty of time for an array of interest groups to wage a campaign of lobbying, grass-roots organizing and television ads, much as they did during the health care debate. The question for the next year will be who will frame the debate for the American people.''What's important now is that this is a battle for definition as much as anything else,'' said Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic pollster. ''The issue of the treaty is completely undefined in the public mind and is in fact probably a new chapter in environmental politics.''Pollsters from both parties agree that the public right now is disposed to favor environmental measures. A New York Times Poll last month found that 65 percent of those polled said the United States should take steps to cut its emissions of greenhouse gases ''regardless of what other countries do.'' And a survey by the Pew Research Center last month found that a majority of Americans would even pay more for gasoline to reduce global warming. But most Americans also favored the idea of universal health care before its opponents swung into action in 1994, ridiculing the complexity of the President's bill and running the ''Harry and Louise'' television ads featuring a couple voicing doubts about the plan's details. White House officials say they learned lessons from that defeat that they are applying to global warming. In his White House appearance on Thursday, Mr. Gore moved immediately to take off the table two potent lines of attack by the Republicans: He said the Administration would not submit the accord to the Senate until developing nations agreed to take part in the global effort. And he said the Administration would use tax incentives, not tax increases, to encourage reductions in emissions of ''greenhouse gases'' that are blamed for global warming.''We were really clear about the words 'no taxes' on day one,'' a senior White House official said. ''It was totally off the table in the first day, really quickly, no fuzziness.''At the same time, White House officials said, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore now have a powerful record on the economy, which they lacked in 1994. Their record on job creation, they argue, will help inoculate the White House against charges that the emissions-reduction effort will hurt the economy. Finally, because the Senate will not actually receive the climate agreement until next year, there will not be actual legislation that can be picked apart. ''Without the legislation, the debate's about protecting the environment,'' a Clinton aide said hopefully. But Republicans are already working to reframe the issue as one of economic security and national sovereignty. This is a theme officials say can unite the Republicans' business base and economic populist faction -- and also tap into sentiment against global trade that surfaced when Mr. Clinton was defeated last month in his attempt to win expanded trade authority from Congress. As was the case in the health care debate, the Republicans are also expecting outside help. Using the same media team of Goddard-Claussen that produced the Harry and Louise ads, the Global Climate Coalition, an association of industry groups and some unions, has already run $13 million in television advertisements against the agreement.

Brace yourself for several years' worth of bad puns about hot air. The Clinton Administration took up a Herculean political task by embracing a treaty negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, to cut emissions that lead to global warming. The coming fight to win ratification of the accord in Congress may make President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore look environmentally responsible, but it also pits them against important constituencies like business and organized labor. The Administration is presented with political risks comparable to those posed by its health-care plan. Under the Kyoto Protocol, the United States is supposed to cut certain emissions 7 percent below 1990 levels over the next 15 years. Other industrialized countries face similar targets, but the developing world has no obligations. Republican Senators denounced the treaty, and the White House said it would not seek ratification until developing countries agree to participate. But such nations say they will not make commitments until industrialized countries start cutting back. JAMES BENNET

VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE swept into the international talks on global warming here last week and, with a bit of drama, added a passage to his speech that was not in the prepared text. He told the delegates from about 160 nations that after conferring with President Clinton by telephone, he was instructing the American delegation ''to show increased negotiating flexibility.''The oratory was hardly soaring -- Mr. Gore's usually isn't -- but with those words, the Vice President helped break an impasse in the talks. And although he invoked the President's name, Mr. Gore later made it clear that adding the critical passage was his idea.''It was primarily influenced by my assessment of the state of play here,'' he said. ''I then consulted with President Clinton back in the White House and added the paragraph that you're referring to.''In other words, it was pretty much Al Gore calling the shots -- another confirmation that the early portrayals of Hillary Rodham Clinton as a ''co-President'' are no longer accurate. Mr. Gore comes closer to filling that role, and now his portfolio is expanding. With Mr. Clinton now running for nothing but his place in history, and wearying of some of the starkly political duties he once enjoyed, he is increasingly turning to Mr. Gore, the man who could help insure the Clinton legacy, as his stand-in. Never one for the funereal fare of past Vice Presidents, Mr. Gore is taking on big roles with gusto as he carefully, but surely, steps forth as a contender for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 2000. On the Team''It seems weekly there are illustrations of the Vice President taking on greater roles, more visible projects that clearly enhance his position,'' said Senator Thomas A. Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader. ''They put him in a strong position to be perceived as heir apparent.''Indeed, Mr. Gore's high-profile assignments -- from debating Ross Perot on free trade early in the Clinton Administration, to landmark telecommunications legislation in 1996, to meetings with leaders in Moscow and Beijing just this year -- have given Americans ample opportunity to grow accustomed to him as an engaged leader, one perhaps even worthy of their trust and future votes. ''He bought into the team -- he's part of it now,'' said Roy Neel, a longtime aide and confidant to Mr. Gore and former deputy chief of staff for Mr. Clinton. ''He's not going to walk away from it.''Which, of course, could be a problem for Mr. Gore: There are perils to being inextricably tethered to a President as shaken by controversy as Mr. Clinton. Consider the inquiries into the Administration's fund-raising practices that knocked Mr. Gore's carefully planned political agenda off stride this year. Though he has perhaps regained momentum after Attorney General Janet Reno's refusal this month to seek an independent inquiry into his fund-raising calls, the Vice President's vulnerability is clear. It has often seemed as if Mr. Gore -- and not the President -- was the favored target of Republicans. Why bag a lame duck when you can weaken the guy who wants his job? Mr. Gore again could have been a target here in Kyoto, particularly since he was the highest-ranking leader to attend -- if only for a day -- and because his credentials on environmental issues are such that Mr. Clinton takes his cues on global warming from Mr. Gore. In the sort of balancing act that will occupy him for the next three years, the Vice President sought to satisfy environmentalists who are the heart of Democratic Party's traditional liberal base as well as the more moderate business interests who helped elect Mr. Clinton in the first place. In this case, the balancing act may have worked. While the global-warming accord reached here won the unqualified praise of few -- and it faces a daunting battle for ratification in the Senate -- Mr. Gore was widely credited by participants for at least helping to keep the negotiations alive. It was the kind of performance that Mr. Gore's loyalists say should help convince people that he deserves the top job.''For the first time in history we have a Vice President who can step into the role of President literally on a moment's notice without missing a beat,'' Mr. Neel said, ''and with the world understanding it would be a seamless handoff.''Mr. Gore's role grows out of the working relationship, and genuine friendship, that has developed between him and the President since the two baby-boom Southerners formed their ticket in the 1992 Presidential campaign. They have weekly private lunches, and their rapport carries over into a high degree of integration between their staffs. White House BoostersIn fact, there is something of a shadow Gore Administration in place already: many of Mr. Clinton's senior aides first worked for Mr. Gore, and have a stake in seeing the Vice President win the office himself in 2000. And in the Cabinet, Andrew Cuomo, the Housing Secretary, and William Daley, the Transportation Secretary, are particularly close to the Vice President. (When he departed Kyoto, Mr. Gore left behind a protege and important player in the talks, Katie McGinty, chairwoman of the Council on Environmental Quality.)The White House's drive to help Mr. Gore is intensifying, as was evident after a recent speech by Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, who is angling to run for the Democratic nomination in 2000. Speaking at Harvard University, Mr. Gephardt offered a sharp critique of the Clinton-Gore agenda, though he did not mention either the President or Vice President by name. The response was swift: Rahm Emanuel, a senior White House aide, publicly castigated Mr. Gephardt for his ''flip-flops on multiple issues.'' It was a surprising break from the tradition of White House officials staying neutral in nomination battles within their own party. Knowing One's PlaceAs he has assumed more Presidential roles, Mr. Gore has taken care not to behave too much like a President. His success thus far has come because he has been careful not to upstage Mr. Clinton.''Al Gore has all the qualities of being a very strong leader,'' said Richard W. Riley, the Secretary of Education. ''But he's the Vice President. He's not trying to be the President as Vice President. That's why they get along so well together.''And as much as Mr. Clinton wants a President Al Gore to complete his legacy, the current President also wants it known that he has not finished burnishing it himself. Insisting he was as engaged as ever, Mr. Clinton said in a recent interview in the Oval Office that ''there will be a lot going on next year.''''And there will be a lot going on in '99,'' he added. ''And a lot going on in 2000.''Correction:  December 21, 1997, Sunday  An article last Sunday about the relationship between President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore referred incorrectly to a member of the Cabinet. William Daley is Secretary of Commerce, not Transportation. Correction: December 21, 1997, SundayAn article last Sunday about the relationship between President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore referred incorrectly to a member of the Cabinet. William Daley is Secretary of Commerce, not Transportation.

The global warming accord was barely signed in Kyoto, Japan, earlier this month when critics pronounced its chances of Senate ratification to be nil. If that is true, then the Senate has clearly misread the American public, which in every survey has expressed an appetite for decisive action. The Senate's attitude also defines what could be President Clinton's biggest challenge in the new year -- leading the Senate where the public wants it to go. Few scientists doubt that the warming of the earth's atmosphere, caused by carbon dioxide and other greenhouse-gas emissions, poses a gigantic threat. But even before Kyoto, the Senate had voted 95 to 0 to reject any treaty that damaged the American economy or did not require developing countries to have their own energy conservation programs. The Kyoto agreement seems not to have satisfied many senators on either count. Mr. Clinton must therefore spend the next year enlisting the participation of developing countries and persuading Congress that the market incentives, tax credits and other strategies he has in mind will dramatically improve energy efficiency nationwide and allow America to meet its emissions targets without throttling the economy. Getting the developing countries to sign up will not by itself carry the day in the Senate. At least 20 senators are unlikely to vote for the treaty under any circumstances, viewing the science as dubious or any kind of environmental regulation as offensive. The key to ratification will be the stance of such pro-environmental Republicans as John Chafee of Rhode Island, James Jeffords of Vermont and Olympia Snowe of Maine. In addition, Senators John McCain of Arizona and Richard Lugar of Indiana, both conservatives, have a record of sensitivity to American international obligations and down the road may well be persuaded to support the treaty, and bring others along. American attitudes toward energy have changed since the 1970's, when gasoline lines and high prices gave sacrifice a bad name. Americans have also coalesced politically around supporting the environment. Senate and House Republican leaders learned that lesson painfully in 1995, when they tried and failed in their assaults on the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts. In addition, as Mr. Clinton pointed out, every major environmental advance of recent years has been described as a potential economic disaster only to prove more doable than previously thought. A two-thirds vote in the Senate is required for ratification. Millions of dollars will be spent by energy companies, agribusiness and labor unions to portray the Administration as bent on destroying the economy. Some Republicans are hoping to demonize the global warming treaty as they demonized Mr. Clinton's health care proposals in 1994. But it is also interesting that some Republicans have begun saying that they do not want to help Vice President Gore ride the environmental issue to the White House in 2000. That means they might be willing to support a treaty and share in the credit. Any serious American effort to reduce greenhouse gases will require sacrifice. Even economists sympathetic to the environment warn against voluntarily bringing a repeat of the 1970's oil shock. The environmental movement would be making a mistake to belittle the anxiety Americans feel about such warnings. But critics of the treaty will make an even greater mistake if they underestimate the public's anxieties about global warming -- and their resolve to address it.

Call it residual meanness or the Ghost of Government Shutdowns Past. But there is little sense of truce this holiday season in the partisan energies that fuel the city's hammering, steaming work world of politics. Wary as Bob Cratchit on his clerk's stool, Lanny J. Davis, the White House counsel who specializes in defending President Clinton from scandal attacks in the news media, fetched up a worrisome lump of coal last week.''It seems to get angrier and nastier,'' Mr. Davis said, after finding amid his holiday mail another dark note from another American citizen who was threatening enough to require the forwarding of the missive to the Secret Service. Usually, Mr. Davis enjoys his role as a kind of strategic Santa in making public the White House's campaign finance ''document dumps'' by the sackful near midnight, or customizing another ''deep-background private placement'' -- a pre-emptive scoop for a reporter who has been good, not bad. But he will not miss the hate-mail wassail that goes with the job when he quits next month after a grinding year's service.''The level of nastiness and hatred'' toward Mr. Clinton generated by his critics is the single deepest impression Mr. Davis says he will take with him.''Christmas or non-Christmas, it's there and it's ugly,'' he said. Cheerier in intent, if no less disapproving of the President, is the Coals for Clinton's Christmas card being sent about town by John M. Snyder, a lobbyist for the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms. The card's verse (''Campaign funds in desperate need/So what if principles he must concede?'') extends holiday wishes for the impeachment of the President. Oh, and for a Happy New Year ''free from Government infringement on the right to legitimate self-defense.''All manner of special-interest wishes festoon the holiday cards. ''Choice On Earth'' is the greeting of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America. And Public Campaign, the political reform lobby, offered a 12-stanza adaptation of ''A Visit From St. Nicholas'' to excoriate endless big-money solicitations:To the tip of corruption!To the edge of the law!Now dash away! Dash away!Dash away all!The season's sleeper card is from Representative Howard Coble, Republican of North Carolina. It is a celebration of Christmas 1990. ''I know, I know,'' begins the greeting from Mr. Coble, explaining the whole thing. Like so much of Vice President Al Gore's message lately, the simple Gore Christmas card has caused controversy because the $150,000 mailing was financed by the Democratic National Committee, leaving party rivals suspecting electioneering humbug over the next Presidential campaign. The jingle of fund-raising continues apace through the season and so do the fund-raising scandal investigations, although the Justice Department's special grand jury on the subject can be hard to convene these days, one prosecutor said, as members go off gift shopping.''Holiday spirit?'' one inquiry-shy Democrat responded furiously to a question. ''The holiday spirit of the House committee is to send U.S. marshals out flashing badges and guns to serve subpoenas on people, including a friend of mine who just got a new job in the private sector,'' he continued, finding the Republican-run inquiry by the Government Reform and Oversight Committee to be  an instrument of the season's you-better-watch-out dictum. Committee Republicans reply that marshal service is standard procedure. But the Democrat, self-protectively anonymous in his complaint, insists the spirit at work, despite the holidays, is intimidation. This is flatly denied by David Bossie, the committee's most feared and openly anti-Clinton staff investigator, who these evenings seems far from formidable. He is happy as an elf as he rides out with Santa on the big red engine from the Volunteer Fire Department in Burtonsville, Md., where Mr. Bossie lives in Spartan dedication in the firehouse. Far from doling subpoenas, he is distributing candy canes to suburban children who have been good for goodness' sake, or at least for the sake of any controlling legal authority. At the Capitol, Speaker Newt Gingrich thought of an unusual gift as he turned on the lights of the lawmakers' tree. ''We'll let C-Span watch a brief period of silence by Newt Gingrich, which will be a historic moment,'' he said, becoming quiet. If it is any comfort to Speaker Gingrich or President Clinton, a Fox News poll has found that most Americans think Santa Claus, fearless proponent of institutionalized giveaway, would enroll Democratic, if he could, while the Grinch Who Stole Christmas would register Republican. With or without such information, the work-place parties go forward, including the ''Thank God Kyoto's Over!'' gala at the Ozone Action lobbying offices, where celebrators just back from the environmental conference in Japan savored some personalized global warming. At the Justice Department, Attorney General Janet Reno stepped out from her party for a moment and could be seen alone gently swaying to the Christmas music in the corridor.  The holiday heavy-lifting award may go to Gen. Henry H. Shelton, the new Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who scheduled three hourlong cocktail parties on Saturday. ''Civilian Informal'' the invitation ordered. Move out. The Supreme Court, ever judicious, held its traditional judges-and-staff-only party in camera. The sound of caroling echoed through the hall of justice to the press room where uninvited reporters sat like urchins outside the jolly consensus. In contrast, reporters at a White House Christmas party slaked themselves in depth at the annual trough. The lamb chops were history early as journalists ate free, then got in the free-photograph line. There, the Clintons smiled patiently, serially, for each photo-op, while some of their severest critics approached with fawning grin.

No matter what effect they have on the coal industry, the Kyoto accords on global climate change will probably not revive the nuclear power industry. Even some reactor makers agree with the energy experts on this one. When a power plant is needed these days, the decision on what kind to build is generally made according to fuel availability and cost, not carbon dioxide output. That is expected to continue, at least until countries that ratify the Kyoto accords put large taxes on carbon emissions. In the longer term, the emission of greenhouse gases from power plants is likely to be cut at least in part by retiring inefficient coal plants, because coal burned in those plants emits the most carbon dioxide. The question then becomes what the most cost-effective approach is. Nuclear reactors produce no carbon dioxide, but they are expensive and pose environmental risks. It might be preferable, experts say, to use the same money to build a much larger number of plants running on natural gas, which produce very little carbon dioxide.''The greenhouse threat is not enough'' to revive nuclear power, said Edward P. Kahn, vice president of a consulting firm, National Economic Research Associates, and an expert on electricity. ''The technology of choice everywhere you go is gas.''Mr. Kahn and others say that utilities have been borrowing technological advances from the aviation business and that the cheapest way to make electricity now is to burn natural gas in combustion turbines, which are essentially giant jet engines bolted to the ground. At many power plants, the waste gases from the jet engines are used to boil water into steam, which is used to turn a steam turbine and make yet more electricity. In such ''combined cycle'' plants, 50 percent of the energy in the natural gas is turned into electricity, compared with about 30 percent in older plants running on fossil fuels. At the Energy Information Administration, a branch of the Energy Department, Jay E. Hakes, the administrator, said: ''The combined-cycle gas plant has raised the bar for every other technology. You can produce electricity at a price 10 years ago people would have said was impossible.''Combined-cycle plants are not carbon-free, of course, but taking their costs into account, some people see them as the best option. Arjun Makhijani, a physicist who is the president of the Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, a nonprofit group in Takoma Park, Md., calculated that a kilowatt-hour from a combined-cycle plant running on gas would emit about 0.12 kilos of carbon, vs. zero for the reactor and 0.4 for an inefficient coal plant. If the aim is to retire as many coal plants as possible with a fixed number of dollars, he said, then for every $2,000 spent, a utility could replace one kilowatt from coal with one kilowatt from a reactor, saving 0.4 kilos. But the same $2,000 would buy two kilowatts from a combined-cycle plant, eliminating 0.8 kilos while emitting only 0.24, eliminating 0.56. His argument, he admits, assumes the continued availability of large volumes of natural gas at reasonable prices. Combustion turbines or combined-cycle plants running on natural gas are being built anywhere gas is available. All over the world, the choice of a type of power plant involves ''joint objectives: safety, economic efficiency, environmental advances,'' said Susan F. Tierney, an energy consultant who was Assistant Secretary of Energy for domestic and international energy policy in President Clinton's first term. ''And right now, your bang for the buck across those objectives is to go for natural gas.''The nuclear industry's main lobbying organization here, the Nuclear Energy Institute, has been arguing for months that global warming is a reason to build more reactors. In a telephone interview, Angelina Howard, a spokeswoman, said there was a ''growing recognition'' of nuclear power's value because a reactor does not produce carbon dioxide, and she pointed out that Japanese officials recently endorsed a plan to build 20 more reactors. But the Japanese Government has long been committed to building more reactors, and has been constrained mostly by finding sites where residents will accept them. China, she said, also wants to build a large number of reactors. Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency, reported earlier this week that China has ordered two 1,000-megawatt reactors from Russia, to begin operating in 2004 and 2005 in Lianyungang, a coastal city northwest of Shanghai. But some companies that build reactors -- and also build competing kinds of generators -- are not jumping to the conclusion that Kyoto will mean more sales.''We don't know what the impact will be,'' said Bruce Bunch, a spokesman for the General Electric Corporation, which builds reactors but also makes gas turbines, steam turbines, hydroelectric plant equipment and generating equipment that would be used in any kind of plant. ''The market will determine it.''So far, the requirements boil down to cost, cost and cost. Roger F. Naill, a spokesman for the AES Corporation of Arlington, Va., which builds power plants around the world, said that no utility, government or electricity customer had even hinted of any interest in global warming.''If we switched from a coal project to a gas project,'' he said, ''in a country where gas is expensive, just because we were do-gooders and wanted to reduce the global warming impact, it starts adding 10, 20 or 30 percent to the cost of a kilowatt-hour.''Some anti-nuclear advocates have also argued that building a reactor, a huge structure of steel and concrete, requires more energy and results in more carbon emissions than building a simpler plant, creating a ''carbon debt.'' A 1,000-megawatt plant typically has a dome 200 feet high, 140 feet in diameter and two and a half feet thick. Because of its chemical makeup, concrete is a major source of carbon dioxide releases. The builders of one nuclear plant completed in the mid-1980's boasted that they had used 275,000 cubic yards of concrete, enough for a two-lane road 100 miles long. Ms. Howard, of the Nuclear Energy Institute, said she did not know how the ''carbon debt'' of a reactor compared with the debt of other generating stations. And Paul C. Parshley, who analyzes utility companies at Lehman Brothers, said, ''It's hard to build a small number of reactors in a large geographical area.'' Running them well requires skilled, experienced engineers and technicians, and ''if you have trouble getting people to go to Gulfport, Miss.,'' he said, ''why should they want to go to the outback of Argentina?''For the United States, new nuclear plants are not likely, because of cost, public opposition, and the failure of the Federal Government to establish a waste repository. At the Energy Information Administration, Mr. Hakes, the administrator, gave a pessimistic view.''Nuclear could conceivably benefit on tighter controls on carbon emissions,'' he said. But with competition now being allowed in electric generation, ''we don't have gains for nuclear'' in the projections. Deregulation of power plant construction has encouraged small, low-cost plants, to minimize investor risk. But nuclear plants are big, capital intensive and hard to build quickly. Extending the life of existing reactors by 10 years beyond when their licenses are now scheduled to retire could cut carbon emissions in 2020 by 2 percent, or 42 million metric tons a year, the agency said recently. Retiring them 10 years before their licenses expire -- which is the current trend -- would raise emissions by 4 percent.

Amid the rolling hills of northeastern Wyoming, a towering five-story plant is using heat and pressure to turn the low-grade coal that abounds here in the 9,700-square-mile Powder River Basin into high-quality fuel -- and, in the process, make that coal less a hazard to the environment. The $60 million experiment by KFx Inc., a small company that has received  help and money from some giants of the energy industry, is in the forefront of a broad effort to extend the life span of one of the world's first, most widely used fuels. In the debates over pollution and global warming, coal has been labeled a prime villain. Coal has long been under assault as a leading contributor to smog and acid rain.  And it could be dealt a severe blow if the proposals to cut carbon dioxide emissions made at the recent talks on global warming in Kyoto, Japan, are eventually adopted. Even in the face of all that, though, some in the coal industry remain decidedly bullish. Coal, they argue, is too deeply entrenched to allow any quick, drastic changes. After all, coal-fired plants produce fully 57 percent of this nation's electricity. And on the pollution front, coal is rapidly cleaning up its act. Many plants have been upgraded with expensive pollution controls, and new processes -- like those KFx is using -- promise to cut pollution further. And part of the process has the potential to cut carbon dioxide as well. In other words, the world may be stuck with coal at least for a while, but that may not be the disaster it might appear. Many utilities regard coal plants as their crown jewels. As the cheapest, most reliable source of electricity, these plants, which now often run far below capacity, are expected to play a sizable role in bringing rates down as the industry deregulates. Coal-fired plants could, in theory, be converted to use some other fuel, but that would be prohibitively expensive. The Edison Electric Institute, which represents most of the nation's investor-owned utilities, has estimated that it would cost close to $30 billion to convert coal plants to use natural gas, which produces less pollution and carbon dioxide. Cleaner fuels, like natural gas, will surely make inroads, but even if utilities are forced to stop using coal, it is doubtful that enough natural gas could be brought into production to displace coal in the near future. In addition, any big shift would cost tens of thousands of jobs, a possibility that seems remote any time soon, considering the political influence of the highly unionized coal industry. Britain learned this lesson recently, putting a halt to issuing new permits for natural-gas-fired plants, whose construction was surging, while it determines the impact on its battered coal industry. In developing countries, coal's future seems even more solid. Coal is expected to merely hold its own in the United States, with the Energy Department predicting 1 percent annual growth through 2015. But China and India, knowing that their own coal is cheap and plentiful enough to last for centuries, plan to build hundreds of coal-fired plants. In the developing world, the Energy Department predicts, coal use will rise about 3.3 percent a year though 2015, nearly doubling the 2.2 billion tons those nations burned in 1995.''Coal is going to be used especially by countries that have lots of it,'' said Robert H. Gentile, an Assistant Energy Secretary in the Bush Administration and now an executive with KFx. Nations like China, India and Pakistan argued in Kyoto that they should not have their coal use limited because it represents the cheapest way to supply their rapidly growing demand for energy. They want nations like the United States, which has just 4 percent of the world's population but produces about a fifth of its carbon dioxide, to take the first steps to cut emissions. Under the Kyoto agreement, industrialized nations would have to cut carbon dioxide emissions 5.2 percent below 1990 levels. The United States would be required to cut them 7 percent from 2008 through 2012. To be sure, the coal and utility industries do not have their heads in the sand. They fully understand that concern over global warming is bound to intensify. That is why KFx and similar ventures are trying to go beyond cutting pollution to try to address concerns on global warming. After some setbacks, KFx restarted its plant several weeks ago, taking coal from the local mines here and heating it to about 725 degrees under intense pressure to remove almost all the water. This process upgrades the coal, enabling utilities to burn about half as much to get the same amount of electricity -- and cut pollution and carbon dioxide emissions in the process. The plant, built at a cost of $40 million, is expected to process 500,000 tons a year of this coal, which the company calls K-fuel. The effort is the brainchild of a group of entrepreneurs led by Ted Venners and his brother John. After making a small fortune in Powder River Basin coal in the 1970's, they decided to risk everything and invest $20 million in the 1980's in this process, developed by an inventor named Edward Koppelman. Mr. Koppelman, who also developed the mechanism that de-ices airplanes, found after years of trial and error that by careful control of time, heat and pressure, the efficiency of coal could be increased. The Venners stand to profit handsomely if their gamble pays off -- if, that is, they can convince utilities in the East and Midwest that they can cut pollution and carbon dioxide and increase plant efficiency by paying top dollar for KFx's upgraded coal. KFx's coal matches the quality of the higher-grade coal mined in the East. But the higher-sulfur Eastern coal, which has a considerably greater energy output in terms of B.T.U.'s, sells for $18 to $25 a ton, while Powder River Basin coal sells for as little as $3. After KFx processes it, it hopes to sell its fuel for as much as the Eastern coal. The KFx process, though, reduces nitrogen oxides by about half and sulfur by up to 20 percent, making it attractive to utilities, which are under pressure to cut these emissions.  Powder River Basin coal is already a low-sulfur coal, but the KFx process reduces the sulfur even more, making it far cleaner than Eastern coal. It can also have an impact, though a more limited one, on global warming. The process has the potential to cut carbon dioxide emissions by about 6 percent, even allowing for the coal used to create the upgraded fuel, since less coal is needed to produce the same amount of energy. The initial investors in KFx persuaded the Thermo Ecotek Corporation, a unit of Thermo Electron, a  Waltham, Mass., company that specializes in bringing new technology to market, to invest $60 million. Also, the Kennecott Energy and Coal Company, a unit of the RTZ-CRA Group of Britain that has become a leading producer of coal, spending about $1 billion since 1990 to buy up reserves in the United States, has provided technical aid. Kennecott will also help finance the building of plants using the KFx process if it proves viable. Customers are starting to appear. American Electric Power, a big coal-burning utility that serves 2.9 million customers in seven states in the East and Midwest, has committed itself to buy 167,000 tons a year from KFx. For American Electric, that is a drop in the coal bucket. As the nation's largest purchaser of coal, it buys about 58 million tons annually. Of that, about 10 million tons is lower-grade coal from the Powder River Basin and other mines in the West, and it wants to see if it would be economical to use the KFx fuel and to what extent it would cut pollution and carbon dioxide. Even if controls are put on carbon dioxide, said Charles A. Ebotino Jr., the utility's senior vice president for fuel supply, ''coal is going to be a large piece of the action.''At the KFx plant, things did not start off smoothly. A fire a year ago forced it to shut for repairs. An error by an engineer led to months of further delay and added cost. The Venners, however, remain undaunted, convinced that the utility and coal industries will have to try out new technology.''It's going to be a mixed bag of solutions,'' said Ted Venners, KFx's chairman. KFx's method for cleaning up coal before it is burned is only one of four basic approaches. One process now becoming widespread is to suspend crushed coal on a jet of air and mix it with limestone; this cuts emissions of sulfur dioxide, which contributes to acid rain. This method also means the fuel burns more efficiently, reducing overall emissions. The most common approach, though, is to treat the emissions after the coal is burned with expensive scrubbers to cut down on sulfur dioxide and particulate emissions. There have also been efforts at coal gasification, in which coal is turned into a gas similar to natural gas. This gas is then used to run power plants. So far, however, the output of electricity is very small. Such approaches should increasingly come into play as utilities do all they can to keep their coal-fired capacity. Just a few miles from the KFx plant is the Wyodak power plant, a prime example of why utilities are reluctant to phase out coal. About 90 tons of coal, extracted from a strip mine next to the plant, are burned hourly to produce some of the nation's cheapest electricity. The coal, often selling for less than $3 a ton and easily mined by huge power shovels, is expected to remain the backbone of many of the nation's power plants for decades to come. The Wyodak plant is one of many owned by Pacificorp, a huge utility in Portland, Ore., that transmits power throughout the Northwest. Pacificorp has $4.6 billion invested in its coal-fired plants. They produce power at an average of about 1.5 cents a kilowatt hour, one of the lowest levels in the nation.''We work very hard to keep our costs low,'' said William Edmonds, a regional affairs administrator for the utility. ''We operate our coal-fired plants at high capacity.''With deregulation opening major markets like California to competition, Pacificorp has geared up to be a big supplier of low-cost power. And coal is a vital part of its strategy. It is such powerful forces that give Ted Venners the will to persevere in an industry that some perceive as on the way to extinction. Driving his big Chevrolet truck along the highway on the way to the plant, he pointed to the rolling hills and said: ''There's enough coal there for 200 to 300 years. It's so cheap to take it out of the ground.''

INTERNATIONALA3-9Israel's Foreign Minister Threatens to Resign Post  Foreign Minister David Levy threatened to resign in the midst of a dispute over the 1998 budget, creating a crisis for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and forcing him to delay the budget vote until Monday. A1One Dead in Belfast Shooting  Tensions rose in Northern Ireland, after a Catholic man was shot dead and five others were wounded when masked Protestant paramilitaries opened fire on a crowded pub in Belfast. The Loyalist Volunteer Force, a breakaway group opposed to peace talks, claimed responsibility and promised more violence in retaliation for the killing of Billy Wright, the group's founder. Talks aimed at ending nearly 30 years of conflict are to resume on Jan. 12. A4Zapatistas Mark Anniversary  Members of the Zapatista National Liberation Army celebrated the fourth anniversary of their invasion of four towns in southern Mexico, which was motivated by their drive for autonomy for the nation's Indians. The Zapatistas have expressed disappointment that little has changed in the four years. A3Rebels Attack Burundi Village  Rebels attacked a village and military camp on the outskirts of Burundi's capital, killing at least 160, in what officials called the biggest rebel assault in that country in recent years. According to the head of security forces in Burundi, the rebel group attacked a village and killed civilians who refused to accompany the guerrillas. The attackers were repelled when they tried to seize the capital's airport. A8Controversy in Kenyan Vote  The situation surrounding the presidential election in Kenya remained explosive as the slow counting of ballots continued. With more than half the constituencies counted, Democratic Party candidate Mwai Kibaki, a former Vice President, was putting up a strong fight against President Daniel arap Moi. Mr. Kibaki and another opposition candidate said they would not accept the results if Mr. Moi were to win, accusing officials of rigging the election. A8Congo to Organize Elections  President Laurent Kabila of Congo said his Government would organize national elections early in 1999. Mr. Kabila made the pledge in a nationally broadcast New Year's address, despite opposition within his own Government and at a time of widespread popular disenchantment with his rule. A8Russia Gets Another New Ruble  Russia introduced new rubles, worth 1,000 times as much as the old ones, marking the third time in less than a decade that the Government has tried to strengthen its battered currency. Old rubles will be accepted along with the new ones for a year, but many Russians have converted their money into dollars, and plan to hold onto the dollars for several weeks out of fear that the change will not be painless. A4NATIONALA10-14Michael Kennedy Died Playing Football on Skis  Michael L. Kennedy, the 39-year-old son of Robert F. Kennedy, who died in a skiing accident in Aspen, Colo., on Wednesday, had been playing football on skis, a game that Kennedys have engaged in for generations on the slopes this time of year, witnesses and family members said. A1Hatch Answers Rehnquist  Responding to the unusually pointed complaint of Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist about the Senate's slow pace in confirming Federal judges, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Orrin G. Hatch, defended the Senate's performance and said the courts themselves were partly to blame for their heavy caseloads. A1Southern Tradition Imperiled  The city of Wilson, N.C., is expected sometime early this year to ban old sofas, recliners and other indoor furniture from porches and yards in what many people see as a clash of the classes and an assault on the rhythms of Southern life. A1Balloonist Heads for Europe  Steve Fossett continued his attempt to circle the world by balloon, soaring at about 80 miles an hour, 22,000 feet over the Atlantic Ocean, more than 225 miles east of Bermuda. Mr. Fossett, who left from St. Louis, was expected to reach Europe by Saturday. A competitor who took off at about the same time had to abort his flight because of a burst helium container. A10Officer's Verdict Overturned  A new trial was ordered for former Detroit police officer Larry Nevers, 57, who was found guilty of second-degree murder in the 1992 slaying of Malice Green, a 35-year-old unemployed steel worker. The conviction of another police officer in the same case had been overturned earlier. Judge Lawrence Zatkoff, who overturned the verdict in the Nevers case, said prejudicial pretrial publicity and errors during the proceedings, such as allowing jurors to see the film ''Malcolm X,'' which opens with video footage of the Rodney King beating -- prevented the police officer from obtaining a fair trial. A10Judge Rules Against Author  A Florida judge ruled that the state may seize money an author made by marketing the confessions of a serial killer, co-writing a book with him and selling his art and autographs. A13New Painkiller Discovered  Taking a clue from a deadly poison found in the skin of a South American frog, researchers have discovered a powerful new painkiller that seems to have all of the benefits of morphine, but none of the damaging side effects. A11Hay Airlifted to Cattle  With the announcement on Wednesday of $2 million in disaster aid for ranchers, the New Mexico National Guard was airlifting hay to 181,000 head of livestock stranded by snow. The Federal Department of Agriculture estimated that some 5,000 cattle had already died. A13NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8Giuliani Calls for Adding 1,600 Police Officers  Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, delivering the inaugural speech for his second term, said he wanted to add 1,600 officers in New York City to what is already the country's largest municipal police force and vowed to use his second term to build on the successes of the first. A1Police Gunfire Comparably Low  F.B.I. statistics show that New York City police officers shoot civilians far less frequently than their counterparts in other major cities. B1The Day After in Times Square  On the morning after Times Square hosted a New Year's Eve party for 500,000 revelers, the neighborhood seemed subdued, but hardly hung over. The neighborhood's rapid recovery was aided by the Times Square Business Improvement District and the city's Department of Sanitation, which planned a huge, synchronized clean-up effort. Twenty-five minutes after the ball dropped, mechanical brooms were whirring down the avenues. Police made just 30 arrests during the festivities. B3NEEDIEST CASESB2WEEKENDE1-35; E37-46OBITUARIESD7Richard Elman  A novelist, poet and critic who taught for many years at the Bennington College Summer Writing Workshops in Vermont, he was 63. D7Floyd Cramer  A pianist who played piano on Elvis Presley's ''Heartbreak Hotel'' and had his own hit, ''Last Date,'' which became an instrumental classic, he was 64. D7SPORTSC1-8Michigan Takes Rose Bowl  Michigan beat Washington State, 21-16, in the Rose Bowl, most likely securing a national championship. C1Ewing Assesses His RecoveryPatrick Ewing, in his first public appearance since suffering a dislocated bone and torn ligaments in his right wrist 12 days ago, said that he believed he would be back at full strength next season and expressed hope that he could be back for this year's basketball playoffs -- if the Knicks can reach the postseason. C1Cubans Seek Bahamas Asylum  Joe Cubas, an agent for a number of Cuban baseball players, said that Orlando Hernandez, half brother of the Florida Marlins' Livan Hernandez, and Alberto Hernandez, no relation, have requested asylum in the Bahamas, where their escape from Cuba led them last weekend. Just in case their request is not honored, Cubas said, he is working to get the players into another country, possibly Costa Rica. C8BUSINESS DAYD1-6, D8South Korea Clears HurdleSouth Korea has cleared a crucial hurdle in its effort to stabilize its battered economy, paying off or extending a large portion of debt it owes foreign banks. But the Korean Government was forced to repay some of the debt because smaller lenders have been unwilling to extend their loans. A1Stallkamp Leads Chrysler  Thomas T. Stallkamp became the president of Chrysler. He had been one of several contenders for president, and his promotion last month caught some people by surprise. He wants to streamline the entire process of building and selling cars and trucks at the company. D1Outlook on Nuclear Power  The Kyoto accords on global climate change will probably not revive the nuclear power industry: Nuclear reactors produce no carbon dioxide, but they are expensive and pose environmental risks. It might be preferable, experts say, to use the same money to build a much larger number of plants running on natural gas, which produce very little carbon dioxide. D1Heart Attacks and the Street  The heart attack death rate during business hours for the 5,000 people who work at the New York Stock Exchange is 60 percent higher than the national rate for men between 18 and 65, according to the National Center for Health Statistics. D2Business DigestD1EDITORIALA16-17Editorials: The Mayor's second term; hurdles for South Korea; environmental tasks in 1998. Column: Anthony Lewis. CrosswordE46WeatherB7

ROSY OUTLOOK  What? Us Worry?  Unruffled by Asia's crisis and buoyed by the promising job market, American consumers approached 1998 with more confidence about their economic future than they have expressed in almost three decades, according to the December survey by the Conference Board. Some 40.6 percent of the respondents to the monthly survey called jobs ''plentiful,'' up from 36.4 percent in November. The optimism was viewed as a strong signal that the economy would remain vibrant, partly because consumer spending accounts for a large portion of domestic growth. The Conference Board's overall confidence index jumped to 134.5 in December, from 128.1 a month before. As if to accent the positive feeling, the Conference Board's leading index of economic indicators rose one-tenth of 1 percent in November. SOUTH KOREA  A Multiparty Bailout  The South Korean Government cleared a crucial hurdle in its effort to stabilize its battered economy, paying off or extending a large portion of its monthly debt to foreign banks. Two days before the due date, some of the world's largest commercial and investment banks -- in tandem with the regulators who oversee them -- had gotten together to push a plan to extend payment deadlines for up to $15 billion in troubled loans to strengthen South Korea's precarious financial position. But as the week wore on, it became clear that the plan was not a done deal. Many smaller banks with less money at stake felt that they had little to gain -- and maybe more to lose -- by rolling over the loans. Even among large banks, the plan was seen as an act of preserving the bottom line: ''The only reason the banks are rolling over the short-term debt is because they know if they call it, the loans will default,'' said David Durrant, an analyst with I.D.E.A., a financial advisory firm in New York. PHONE REGULATION  Happy New Year, Baby Bells  A Federal judge struck down major sections of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, saying the law unfairly kept the regional Bell telephone companies out of the long-distance market. Should the ruling survive the appeals process, it would allow the Bells to offer long-distance service for the first time since AT&T was broken up in 1984. Not surprisingly, AT&T was not amused, calling the ruling ''inexplicable and clearly erroneous.''TECHNOLOGY  A Disk for the Verbose  I.B.M. says it has broken the magnetic disk-drive storage barrier of 10 billion bits of data per square inch. The company said the new technology would first appear in products in 2001. A 2.5-inch disk drive will be able to hold 6.5 gigabytes of data, making possible ultraslim laptop computers that will nevertheless have vast storage capacity. A 3.5-inch platter will hold 12 to 13 gigabytes. A gigabyte is a billion bytes, equivalent to about 62,500 double-spaced, typewritten pages. BROWSER WARS  Click if You Dislike Microsoft  The Justice Department accused Microsoft last week of ''disobedience'' and of ''jerry-rigging its own products'' in response to a Federal judge's order to allow the makers of personal computers to license Microsoft's Windows operating system without being forced to also load its Internet browsing software. The comments were made in a filing in United States District Court in Washington, as the antitrust battle between the Justice Department and the Microsoft Corporation continued to escalate. In the filing, the Government also proposed what many computer users see as a quick solution for unbundling Microsoft's browser, Internet Explorer, from Windows -- simply use a Windows 95 feature for adding and removing programs, which is labeled ''Add/Remove Programs.'' The Government noted that on Nov. 18, on a page of Microsoft's Web site, the company itself said that removing Internet Explorer, or I.E., was not a daunting technical challenge that would cripple recent versions of Windows -- as the company told the court earlier this month. CLIMATE CHANGE  Nuclear-Power Economics  The nuclear industry's main lobbying organization, the Nuclear Energy Institute, has been arguing for months that global warming is a reason to build more reactors. But neither these arguments nor the Kyoto accords on global climate are likely to revive nuclear power. For better or worse, when a power plant is needed these days, the decision on what kind to build is generally made according to the availability and cost of fuel, not the potential output of carbon dioxide. And many experts argue that the cheapest way to make electricity now is to burn natural gas in combustion turbines, which are essentially giant jet engines bolted to the ground. In such ''combined cycle'' plants, 50 percent of the energy in the natural gas is turned into electricity, compared with about 30 percent in older plants running on fossil fuels. JOBS  Littler Town of Bethlehem  The Bethlehem Steel Corporation is shutting the last factory in its hometown, cutting the last 800 jobs in its coke division by the end of March. The last steelmaking furnace in Bethlehem closed two years ago. . . . Nationsbank expects to cut more than 6,000 jobs in Florida once it takes over Barnett Banks. . . . But even those numbers seem small potatoes compared with the situation in France, where the latest figures show that 12.4 percent of the labor force is out of work (compared with 4.6 percent in the United States in November). . . . The Toyota Motor Corporation is thinking about making luxury sport vehicles in the United States as early as 2000. A second assembly line might be built at a plant already under construction in Princeton, Ind. Toyota also announced that it would build a new plant in France. NEW VENTURES  Let's Talk Stopping Power  Smith & Wesson, famous for its handguns, is turning to a new tool for law enforcement: bicycles. The company, the nation's largest handgun maker, has wheeled out a line of police bicycles complete with lights and sirens, The Associated Press reported. David Sargeant, business manager for Smith & Wesson, estimated that more than 20,000 police officers across the country now patrol on bicycles, and their numbers are expected to increase sharply. Several bicycle companies, including Raleigh, Trek and BMW, already make special police models of their mountain bikes. But Smith & Wesson sees its entry into the field as an expansion of a line of law enforcement equipment that includes everything from handcuffs to identification kits. The company's 24-speed mountain bikes range from $750 to $1,200. Correction:  January 25, 1998, Sunday  A report in the Business Diary column on Jan. 4 about the data storage capacity of new I.B.M. disk drives referred incorrectly to the size of a gigabyte. It is equivalent to about 512,000 double-spaced, typewritten pages of text, not 62,500. (A gigabyte is 1.024 billion bytes; the computation is based on 2,000 characters to a typewritten page.)Correction: January 25, 1998, SundayA report in the Business Diary column on Jan. 4 about the data storage capacity of new I.B.M. disk drives referred incorrectly to the size of a gigabyte. It is equivalent to about 512,000 double-spaced, typewritten pages of text, not 62,500. (A gigabyte is 1.024 billion bytes; the computation is based on 2,000 characters to a typewritten page.)<br>

For anyone worried about global warming, last week's most heartening news came from an unlikely source -- the North American International Auto Show in Detroit. All three auto makers announced that they were nearing production of marketable cars that will rely less on gas-burning engines and more on exotic power sources like fuel cells. Because conventional engines account for one-third of America's output of carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas, this was a revelation of potentially enormous significance. It was also, in a way, amusing, or so it must have seemed to President Clinton. Mr. Clinton has placed a heavy bet on the proposition that American technological know-how can counter the global warming threat at relatively low cost. For this he has been soundly bashed by the auto makers, the producers of coal and oil and other industries that spent millions of dollars last year belittling the threat of global warming and warning that any serious effort to fight it, like the treaty Mr. Clinton agreed to in Kyoto, Japan, would bankrupt the American economy. Yet here were some of the President's fiercest critics tripping over one another to tout their ''green'' cars and, in the process, suggesting that Mr. Clinton's faith in technology may not be misplaced. Al Gore could also be forgiven a smile. In his 1992 book, ''Earth in the Balance,'' the Vice President called for ''eliminating'' the internal combustion engine in the next 25 years -- a comment  that reinforced his reputation in some circles as a dangerous thinker. Yet right there at the auto  show, the chairman of the General Motors Corporation, John Smith, stated flatly that ''no car company will be able to thrive in the 21st century if it relies solely on internal combustion engines.'' To Detroit-watchers, this seemed an epiphany. To anyone who has followed the big environmental struggles of the past quarter-century, Detroit's change of tune fit neatly into a familiar historical pattern. There has always been a big gap between industrial leaders who say they cannot do something and their engineers, who usually figure out a way to do it. Before Congress passed the 1970 Clean Air Act, Detroit argued that significant pollution reductions would be utterly impractical or prohibitively expensive. Then along came the catalytic converter that, at modest cost, eventually cut harmful tailpipe emissions by 95 percent. Likewise, the oil companies predicted economic doom when Congress mandated cleaner fuels in 1990. Their chemists, however, have since managed to produce such fuels without disturbing profits. As the record suggests, American industry is not known for spontaneous acts of environmental virtue. But it will respond to timely regulation and commercial realities. One such reality is that Japan is moving quickly to develop low-emission cars. The Japanese caught Detroit flat-footed with their small cars during the oil-price shocks in the 1970's, and Detroit clearly does not wish to be left behind again. In this case, the Federal Government has become an active partner rather than a regulatory adversary. Many of the latest innovations have emerged from the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles, into which Washington has poured nearly $400 million over the last four years. One question now is whether the auto makers will continue to oppose the Kyoto treaty. The comment by G.M.'s Mr. Smith suggests that Detroit is beginning to see itself as a critical part of the eventual solution to global warming. If true, that would be the most hopeful news of all from the automobile show.

In the news according to ''Prey,'' there is one small ecological detail that slipped by the global warming conference in Kyoto, Japan, last month. Warming has caused a new species of beings to evolve. They look human, but their brains work faster than the fastest computers. And, quite inconveniently, most are serial killers determined to wipe out humankind and become the dominant species. That is how this surprisingly lively new series came by its droll promotional slogan, ''You've just been bumped down the food chain.''To make the game more interesting, the only way to distinguish the new species from humans is by a DNA test. There you have a minor legacy of the O. J. Simpson trial: DNA testing as a pop culture accessory. Silly at its core and straight-faced in its delivery, ''Prey'' is also effective as a thriller and a sly science-fiction story. Though it is reminiscent of the movie ''Species'' in its racing, up-against-them action, the show's real strength is its creepy ''X-Files'' paranoia. Anyone who looks human, after all, could be out to kill you. The heroine is a young bio-anthropologist named Sloan Parker (Debra Messing) who makes an unlikely discovery while testing the DNA of a convicted murderer. ''Oh, my God, he's not human,'' she says to the computer screen, and soon to her loyal colleague, Dr. Ed Tate (Vincent Ventresca). This discovery, of course, puts her in danger. From then on, in the classical tradition of smart-but-stupid suspense heroines, Sloan tends to walk into dark, scary places alone. But she is befriended by a kindly nonhuman, Tom Daniels (Adam Storke), who sometimes comes out of the shadows to save her.''Prey'' tosses in every element the genre can bear. The F.B.I. knows more than it's telling. A police detective (Frankie R. Faison) believes Sloan's story. The weak link is the new head of Sloan's lab (Larry Drake), played so ominously he would appear to have a nonhuman connection even if Sloan hadn't discovered a new life form. It is easier for a story like this to work once than to sustain its surprise, so there's no telling where ''Prey'' will go. If it develops any humor, Sloan might turn her thoughts to practical matters. Saving humanity is fine in the long run, but for now shouldn't she be working on a portable DNA test that will let you enter a cocktail party and avoid making small talk with a killer nonhuman? PREY  ABC, tonight at 8TELEVISION REVIEW

Recent destruction of the Amazon rain forest is the worst ever recorded, surpassing even the years of deforestation that set off an international outcry to save the forests, according to data issued by the Brazilian Government today. The figures show that deforestation nearly tripled between the 1990-91 and 1994-95 burning seasons. Some 11,196 square miles of Amazon rain forest were destroyed in the 1994-95 burning season, the figures show, or an area larger than New Jersey. In contrast, on the eve of the 1992 Earth Summit here, deforestation had dipped to 4,247 square miles. The release of the figures was delayed while Brazil attended the world conference on global warming in Kyoto, Japan, last month and while it petitioned the world's seven richest industrial nations to step up environmental aid at a meeting in Manaus, Brazil, in late October. The Brazilian Amazon, roughly the size of Western Europe, contains the world's largest collection of plant and animal species -- many of which have yet to be studied for their potential medicinal, nutritional or ecological value -- as well as 20 percent of the world's fresh water supply. The figures issued today show that 6,950 square miles of the Amazon were destroyed from 1995 to 1996, less than in the previous year, but sharply up from the average annual levels in the rest of the decade.''It shows the situation was not under control as the Government kept insisting over the last two years,'' said Garo Batmanian, head of the Brazilian office of the World Wildlife Fund. ''We're destroying our biodiversity. Humanity is becoming poorer.''Earlier this month, a separate study issued by a Congressional commission showed that 22,393  square miles of the Amazon were being destroyed each year through deforestation -- which shows up on satellite images -- as well as through logging, ground fires and thinning of previously virgin forest, which may occur undetected by satellites beneath the forest canopy. The Woods Hole Research Institute, studying the same phenomenon, concluded last year that the Amazon is reaching an unprecedented level of dryness, raising the threat that rain forest could catch fire and burn out of control. The last time Government officials released deforestation figures, two years ago, they showed a 34 percent increase over the 1990-91 period. And as they did then, officials today announced a series of proposals. These included steps to regulate forest burnings and logging concessions, to appropriate large landholdings, and to coordinate policies between the Government's land reform and environmental agencies. But many of the measures, Mr. Batmanian said, lacked the money or the legislation to be effective, and represented a ''wish list'' more than a plan of action. On Tuesday, the Brazilian Congress is scheduled to vote on a bill that would establish criminal penalties for some acts of environmental harm and to grant the federal environmental agency legal authority to enforce environmental statutes. The bill has languished in Congress for seven years. Without such authority, the agency charged with protecting the environment is largely ignored by the people and industries it is supposed to regulate. According to Government figures, it collects only 6 percent of the fines it levies. While the bill, which is expected to pass, is critical to establishing an environmental policy, under pressure from the industrialists' lobby the Government watered down stiff penalties that originally included possible prison time.''Clearly it's a long overdue step for the Brazilian Government to give its environmental agency statutory authority, but the way they're doing it -- loosening the laws, giving away the farm to the special interests -- is going to make it very difficult for Brazil to effectively prosecute multinational companies logging illegally,'' said Stephan Schwartzman, senior scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund, a nonprofit group based in Washington. Environmentalists here have long contended that destruction of the rain forest is linked more closely to the state of the economy than to any Government environmental policy. The data issued today showed deforestation breaking all previous records as the Government's economic stabilization plan got under way, in late 1994, when the price of land fell and it became more profitable to farm and ranch land than to hold it idle as an investment. As the plan took hold in 1996, the rate of deforestation dropped somewhat, but still remained high.''It's clear from the amount of increase, and the fluctuations in it, that Government environmental policy has had precious little influence on this process in the 1990's,'' said Mr. Schwartzman. Figures from 1978 to 1988, which caused a global protest, put the average annual destruction at 8,158 square miles. The Government added to the controversy today by contending that a large share of the deforestation was a result of agrarian reform that turned over more land to smallholders. It based the claim on data showing that most of the deforestation was a result of fires of less than 247 acres in size. According to the Congressional report released earlier this month, the Government has settled landless peasants on 18,146 square miles of virgin rain forest. But Marcio Nogueira Barbosa, director of the Brazilian Space Agency, said the satellite images do not show any link between agrarian reform and deforestation. New settlers, he said, account for no more than 10 percent of the deforestation totals. The Space Agency issued partial data for 1997 projecting a sharp drop in deforestation, back to 1992 levels, based on a survey through August of areas where deforestation has occured in the past. Environmentalists rejected the figures as untrustworthy, though Mr. Barbosa contended they were correct within a five percent margin of error. ''The fact that it's in a descent is no reason for celebration,'' he said.

The Clinton Administration announced a research effort with automotive companies today to improve sharply the fuel economy of sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and mini-vans, using techniques borrowed from the Pentagon. Secretary of Energy Federico F. Pena said the goal would be to increase by 50 percent by 2004 the number of miles that these so-called light trucks can travel on a gallon of gasoline or diesel. With sales of light trucks rising quickly, improved fuel economy for them would conserve energy while curbing emissions of carbon dioxide, the main gas linked to global warming. The plan announced today involves Government work in partnership with the Big Three automobile companies and seven regional consortiums of component manufacturers and high-technology start-up companies. The Energy Department and the Transportation Department will take over a research program on medium- and heavy-duty vehicles from the Defense Department. The research into heavy trucks will continue, with the goal of doubling the gas mileage of 18-wheel trucks. The military has already developed a Humvee that can go twice as far as previous models on a gallon of fuel, with better acceleration, quieter operation and less pollution.''It's important for us to focus on light trucks and heavy trucks,'' said Mr. Pena, who said trucks were the fastest-growing segment of the transportation business. Gasoline consumption by cars is projected to show little change through 2020, while light truck consumption of gasoline is expected to rise steeply, according to a chart that Mr. Pena displayed. The new research effort into light trucks was mostly put together in the last two months, in response to rising sales of light trucks and growing public interest in them, Federal officials said. The Government defines sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and mini-vans as light trucks, though mini-vans and a few sport utility vehicles are actually based on car designs. The Administration has asked Congress for $50 million for truck research, to be matched by at least $50 million from the auto industry. But if Congress rejects that request, the Administration plans to conduct light truck research anyway, on a smaller scale. The auto industry has said it would only produce high-mileage vehicles if they can be made for a price consumers would pay. According to the Energy Department, about 2 million of the approximately 9.5 million barrels of fuel used daily for highway vehicles goes into trucks and buses, and nearly 3 million into ''light trucks,'' many of which are household vehicles. The United States agreed at an international conference last December in Kyoto, Japan, to curb its man-made emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that are believed to contribute to global warming. According to a research paper last autumn by an Environmental Protection Agency official, light trucks will account for the biggest increase in so-called greenhouse gas emissions by the United States over the next two decades. The new program is meant to do for heavier vehicles what the Partnership for the Next Generation Vehicle, begun four years ago, is expected to do for cars. That program, undertaken by the Government, with the Ford Motor Company, the Chrysler Corporation and the Corporation, is meant to develop by 2004 a production-ready prototype of a 5-passenger car that would get up to 80 miles a gallon with no sacrifice in safety, performance, convenience or cost. The new research effort and the existing Next Generation partnership are likely to use similar technologies. The main one, demonstrated in the Humvee, involves switching from an internal-combustion engine to a hybrid system, in which a small engine, running on gasoline or diesel fuel, operates steadily to run an electric generator and charge batteries or feed drive motors on the wheels. When the vehicle needs extra power, it draws it from the batteries, and when it needs no power, for example, when it has stopped, the internal combustion engine keeps running to feed the batteries. Because the engine runs at nearly constant speed, it is cleaner and more efficient. The Humvee, built by PEI Electronics, an independent company spun off by Chrysler earlier this year, will go approximately 18 miles on a gallon of diesel fuel instead of 9; accelerates from 0 to 50 miles an hour in seven seconds instead of 14, and can climb a 60 percent grade at 17 m. p. h. instead of 6 m. p. h. It can also run 20 miles on batteries alone, which suits the Pentagon's needs, because in that mode it is nearly silent and is also hard to find with a heat-detection system. Advanced Vehicle Systems of Chattanooga, Tenn., showed off a 22-foot hybrid electric bus at the press conference here, with a turbine that runs on natural gas for recharging the batteries. It has greatly reduced emissions of the pollutants that cause smog and the ones linked to global warming.

The Atlantic Richfield Company announced a preliminary agreement yesterday to sell its large coal business in the United States to a unit of Beacon Group, a New York investment firm that would become the second-biggest coal operator in the country with the purchase. ARCO said all principal terms and conditions had been negotiated, but a binding agreement had not been completed. It did not disclose terms, but a source close to the bidding said ARCO had sought about $1.6 billion. ARCO, a major oil company based in Los Angeles, put its coal business up for sale last year as part of a broader strategy to focus on exploration for other sources of petroleum because of dwindling supplies at its field in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska. ARCO  said it would use the proceeds of the coal sale for that purpose. For Beacon's Alliance Coal Corporation, the deal represents a bet that coal will remain a critical source of fuel for generating electricity despite the emission of carbon dioxide from burning coal, which has been blamed for global warming. As part of the transaction, ARCO said Alliance would get an unspecified investment from the Texas Pacific Group, a firm known for investing in underperforming businesses. That is the second big deal in a week for Texas Pacific, which agreed to invest $350 million in Oxford Health Plans a few days earlier. Alliance Coal, which already owns mines in the Midwest and East, would expand into three Western states with the addition of ARCO Coal, which is based in Denver. ARCO has two mines in the Powder River Basin in Wyoming and one mine in Colorado. It also owns three mines in Utah in partnership with the Itochu Corporation of Japan. The mines in Wyoming, known as Black Thunder and Coal Creek, are considered two of the most productive and profitable mines in the region. Two other companies, the Kennecott Energy and Coal Company, which has spent about $1 billion since 1990 buying up coal assets, and Arch Coal Inc., had been interested in buying the ARCO mines. Kennecott Energy is a subsidiary of RTZ-CRA.Last year all of the ARCO mines in the United States produced 53.2 million tons of coal. With such added production, Alliance would become the largest producer in the United States behind the Peabody Coal Company. About 50 percent of the electricity in the United States is generated by burning coal. Coal is also one of the lowest-cost fuels and is cheap to mine in the Powder River Basin, where tons of it at a time are scooped into rail cars. The coal is then delivered to utilities in the West and Midwest. Some companies are betting that despite attempts at the summit meeting on global warming in Kyoto, Japan, last December to limit carbon dioxide emissions, coal use will increase. As states deregulate their utilities the demand for inexpensive electricity from coal-fired plants is expected to rise. Alliance, through its subsidiary, Mapco Coal Inc., owns and operates eight coal mines in Illinois, Kentucky, Maryland and Virginia.

ON 80 acres of the wettest land in Catahoula Parish in Louisiana, an experimental crop of hardwood saplings is seizing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and locking it up in wooden cells. The foot-high seedlings of ash, oak, and pecan are barely two years old. Still overshadowed by annual weeds, they are struggling to establish roots under the perennial floods of the bayou. But on each acre, the trees probably take in as much carbon dioxide each year as a typical automobile puts out, according to the scientists at Louisiana Tech University who  manage the project. So while there are skeptics, this experiment in what scientists call the sequestration of carbon, if it can be replicated on a large scale, could represent a significant weapon against the risk of global warming caused by manmade carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. To stop carbon dioxide from reaching dangerous concentrations in the atmosphere may require people to shift away from fossil fuels, according to most of the experts advising the nations who have signed the international treaty to combat the problem. In the meantime, the world's forests represent an enormous reservoir for carbon dioxide, which is naturally removed from the air when trees and other photosynthetic organisms grow and multiply. The role of trees in mitigating carbon dioxide emissions can be expanded further if they can be used as renewable fuels, offsetting the use of fossil fuels, if wood products substitute for energy-intensive products like steel, and if shade trees are planted in cities and neighborhoods, reducing the demand for air conditioning.''The carbon problem is very huge,'' said Neil Sampson, a forestry consultant who has extensively studied the role of wood in fighting global warming. ''It looks to us like trees and forestry can handle perhaps 30 percent of it. That is a significant role, if you don't expect it to be the only role.''Pilot studies suggest that it will cost just a few dollars per ton of carbon -- estimates range from less than $1 to more than $30, depending on the circumstances -- to increase the sequestration of carbon dioxide in trees by expanding the planet's total forested area. That is considerably cheaper than the costs some economists have projected for controlling industrial emissions of carbon dioxide. And if the new protocol to the climate change treaty that was negotiated in Kyoto in December goes into force, and the United States sets up a market-based system for encouraging the least costly steps to reduce net emissions of carbon, growing trees could be one profitable path to the goal. The prospect, though, has stirred up a powerful debate over how to measure the complex cycle in which trees take carbon from the atmosphere and slowly release it after they die, how to verify that reductions are actually achieved, and how to encourage foresters to capture the largest possible benefits. Doubters say that allowing emissions in one place to be offset by trees grown somewhere else is unfair and unreliable. Even its advocates say that forestry can only handle a fraction of the greenhouse gas problem. And adding to an already heated debate, some United States lawmakers who have not previously supported action on global warming, but who favor expanded logging on public lands, have been arguing that it makes the most environmental sense to cut down mature forests, which are no longer growing quickly, and replace them with vigorous saplings, which bulk up more quickly.''Science has proven to us that carbon dioxide, the leading greenhouse gas, can be taken out of the atmosphere by properly managing our forests,'' said Representative Don Young, Republican of Alaska, the chairman of the House Resources Committee. ''Carbon dioxide is kept out of the atmosphere by harvesting the forest before it begins to decompose or burn, thus storing the carbon in wood products that are environmentally friendly, as well as providing an economic benefit to society.''Other experts said that Mr. Young has oversimplified the situation. And indeed, the question of how best to use the world's forests to fight global warming has only begun to be addressed in detail. At the Kyoto talks, where the world's industrial nations pledged to reduce net emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases by an average of 5 percent below 1990's levels over the next 10 to 15 years, they agreed to count additions and subtractions of carbon dioxide caused by ''direct human-induced land use change and forestry activities, limited to afforestation,'' or turning land into forest, ''reforestation, and deforestation since 1990.''But they left to a specialized committee the task of setting up accounting rules, and there is likely to be scientific and political debate before important questions are settled.''If sequestration is done correctly, it can produce many benefits,'' said Michael Oppenheimer, a climate scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund, an advocacy group based in New York. ''It can enhance ecosystems and remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. But done poorly, it can make the greenhouse problem worse and do a lot of damage to the ecosystem.''Dan Becker, the head of climate programs at the Sierra Club, is more dismissive.''In order to offset U.S. industrial emissions, you would need to plant a new forest on an area the size of Australia,'' he said. ''You are taking carbon that is safely sequestered underground, as coal or oil, and bringing it up, and adding it to the atmosphere. And then you are temporarily storing it in a closet made of trees. I am all for preserving forests, and I am against cutting down forests. But is it a good thing to pollute more because you have done that? No.''Mr. Becker and other skeptics said that it would be almost impossible to verify the amount of carbon being set aside in forests, especially if the projects are widespread and if international conservation programs are used to offset domestic emissions in the United States, as is already being ventured. But Steven P. Hamburg, who teaches environmental studies at Brown University and has been closely involved in the United Nations research into forestry's role in global warming, said that the difficulties of estimating the amount of sequestration are exaggerated.''The bottom line is that we have been assessing the growth of forests for a century, and we have very well-established methods for doing it,'' he said. ''We can measure with confidence the carbon in trees with an uncertainty of plus or minus 10 percent, without any difficulty.'' In carefully controlled studies of forests in Russia, he said, the standard formulas used by American scientists predicted actual carbon content of trees within an accuracy of 3 percent. Perfecting the estimates is one objective of the small experiment in Louisiana. But other goals include figuring out what methods work best in turning abandoned bean fields back into bottom land hardwood wetlands. For the past few decades this type of wetland has been disappearing fast, but with changing farm policies there are opportunities to restore trees to vast areas of the Mississippi River Valley. Like other forestry projects across the country and around the world, this plot of land, managed by scientists at the School of Forestry at Louisiana Tech in Ruston, is being paid for by companies that usually produce watts, not woods. Electric utilities, which voluntarily promised the Energy Department that they would reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide by 2000, are using tree projects as one way to meet that commitment. Utilitree Carbon Company, a consortium of utilities, has projected that the $176,000 project in Louisiana will remove tens of thousands of tons of carbon dioxide from the air over the next several decades: just seven tons an acre per year, but hundreds of tons per acre by the end of the 70-year growing cycle. There are other benefits to growing trees in wetlands. The Louisiana tract is part of a 7,000-acre area trees can be grown next to a state wildlife refuge, and quite aside from its role in offsetting the emissions of greenhouse gases far away, putting it into trees will provide important wildlife habitat and other environmental benefits. And there is a lot of similar land available for forestry projects. Over four million acres of bottom land hardwood forests were cleared in the Mississippi River Valley in the 1970's for agriculture, even though the land was poorly suited for that purpose. Mr. Sampson, who edited a two-volume collection of research for American Forests, a conservation organization, has estimated that the forests offer ways to reduce net carbon emissions in the United States by  314 million tons to 695 million tons per year, or between 21 and 46 percent of estimated annual emissions of 1.5 billion tons. He bases his estimate on a diverse package of forestry-related programs: planting trees on marginal land, altering forest management practices to speed growth of existing timber, increasing the use of renewable wood fuel, and planting trees in cities and near houses, where they can reduce energy consumption for air conditioning. In Congress, pro-logging lawmakers have suggested that the best way to maximize sequestration might be to cut down mature forests and replace them with fast-growing plantations of trees, keeping the carbon locked up in the wood for decades after it is harvested, in the form of homes, telephone poles, books and the like. In October, the House passed a nonbinding resolution calling on the United States ''to manage its forests to maximize the reduction of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, among many other objectives.''That wording was a compromise to mollify environmentalists and their supporters in the House. But the resolution was pressed by Mr. Young, Representative Helen Chenoweth, Republican of Idaho, chairwoman of the forestry subcommittee, and other pro-logging lawmakers. They draw their argument from researchers like John Perez-Garcia, an associate professor of forestry at the University of Washington, who has argued that some forest conservation efforts have perversely added carbon dioxide to the atmosphere by depressing logging. That, he argues, leads to the use of steel and other substitute materials, while allowing forests to get overgrown to the point that they burn. Indeed, there have been estimates that managing a Douglas fir forest in the Pacific Northwest as a monoculture plantation, and harvesting all the trees every 60 years, could sequester more carbon in the wood and in wood products while the tree farm's growth is at its peak than could be accomplished through other approaches. The alternatives studied included leaving the forest alone, or harvesting parts of the forest year to year while leaving its complex ecosystem more or less intact. But this kind of calculation ignores important facts about the carbon cycle and the overall health of forests. For example, when a forest is clear-cut, the carbon in its soil begins to dissipate almost right away, a source of carbon dioxide emissions that lasts for decades. And the other benefits of a forest, such as watershed protection, rich habitat, and recreational use, are destroyed.''In general, I don't think that is good management,'' said Dr. Hamburg of Brown. ''I don't think you could come up with any data to suggest that you could intensively manage those forests and increase carbon sequestration.''

GASOLINE costs far less than designer water, and while Americans say in surveys that they want cleaner, more fuel-efficient vehicles, they are buying record numbers of gas-chugging trucks, which pollute more than cars do.. So is there any reason to fear for the future of the internal-combustion vehicle? Perhaps, though the traditional gasoline engine -- which uses the energy of gases that explode when fuel is ignited inside it -- will not go away quietly, or quickly. Even the experts writing the obituary for the internal-combustion engine -- whose basic workings were established by Gottlieb Daimler in 1885 -- see it as a mainstay for several more decades, probably in conjunction with other, more modern technologies. But partly as a public-relations move, partly as a result of government pressure and partly to keep competitors from gaining a technological edge, virtually all the world's leading auto makers are exploring technologies that could ultimately make their current products obsolete.''No car company will be able to thrive in the 21st century solely with the internal-combustion engine,'' the chairman of the General Motors Corporation, John F. Smith Jr., said at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit in January. Like many of its rivals, G.M. used that event to show off concept vehicles having an array of power sources. One impetus is a realization that pollution standards are likely to become more stringent. Already, California and four Northeast states, including New York, have set stricter emissions rules than the rest of the country. Further, the Kyoto agreement on global warming would require developed nations to reduce greatly the emissions of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide. On another front, car makers recognize that although gasoline prices are at record lows today, they cannot remain so indefinitely. Vice President Al Gore has called for auto makers to develop family cars that go 80 miles on a gallon of gas. Further, economical cars are essential in Europe and Japan, where gas is expensive, as well as in emerging, potentially lucrative markets like China. But while a few alternative-fuel vehicles have reached the market, and many more are on the way, the most innovative -- and expensive -- vehicles may never be more than concepts. As of now, even the brightest engineers cannot say which of several promising technologies will take the lead. For the short term, a number of companies are continuing to improve gasoline and diesel engines, vastly reducing emissions while bolstering performance and economy. Others are directing their investments into particular types of research, like advanced batteries and fuel cells. But the biggest companies are hedging their bets by developing a portfolio of alternative vehicles; if one technology emerges as the leader, they can quickly pull a vehicle off the shelf. Auto makers are also working on devices that store energy, like flywheels and ultracapacitors. And they are experimenting with lightweight materials like aluminum, plastics and magnesium that may make future vehicles much more efficient. Still, new power sources are particularly intriguing, because of their potential to redefine personal transportation. Here is a look at some leading alternative technologies and their prospects. ELECTRICS  The Glow May Be TemporaryThe earliest electric cars never fulfilled their promise, and faded away by the 1930's. Their long-discussed revival has been slow in coming because of the limited distance they can travel without recharging the batteries. Still, a number of electric vehicles have come to market. Because the cars meet zero-emissions rules in California and the Northeast, they offer a quick fix until other technologies, like fuel cells, are practical.  Many experts now predict that electric power is likely to be used to compliment other technologies -- unless a technical breakthrough makes electric cars fully competitive with other types of vehicles. Batteries differ chiefly by the metals used in them; this determines how quickly they deliver energy and defines their range, but each increase in range comes at a substantially higher price. Lead-acid batteries, the current standard, seem likely to be supplanted by nickel-metal-hydride versions, like those in laptop computers. The next step up is lithium-ion. Most electric models are conversions of traditional vehicles. While small companies like the Solectria Corporation of Wilmington, Mass., have been selling these conversions for years, the big auto makers are new to the game. General Motors entered the market in 1996 with its two-seat EV1, available through Saturn dealers in California and Arizona. But only a few hundred people have leased one. The Honda EV-Plus, the first vehicle to use nickel-metal-hydride batteries, was also designed from the ground up as an electric vehicle, and it can be leased by consumers in California. An electric version of the Toyota RAV4 also uses this type of battery, which will be phased into use in the EV1 and G.M.'s S-10 electric pickup. Nissan is testing its Altra EV, powered by lithium-ion batteries, with utilities in California. Consumers may be able to purchase the car within two years. PROS  Zero emissions.  Extremely quiet.  Extremely smooth.  Low operating cost.  Low maintenance cost. CONS  Limited range (typically 100 miles or less, depending on outside temperatures and driving conditions).  Limited charging facilities.  Short battery life.  Excessive weight.  Less power than a gasoline engine.  High purchase price. ALTERNATIVE FUELS  Ample and Clean, but Not PerfectWhile working to develop hybrid and fuel-cell vehicles as long-range solutions, the auto industry has been focusing its short-term efforts on alternative fuels like compressed natural gas, ethanol, methanol and liquefied petroleum, or L.P., gas. These fuels burn cleaner than gasoline, but are far less dense and take up far more space. Further, they lack the distribution systems needed for refueling. L.P. gas and compressed natural gas require heavy storage tanks that add weight to a vehicle. Many alternative-fuel vehicles on the market are powered by compressed natural gas. Made up primarily of methane, natural gas is extracted from abundant underground reserves. It costs less than gasoline. Ethanol and methanol are alcohol-based fuels. Ethanol is produced from grain or agricultural waste. Methanol is an odorless, clear liquid produced from natural gas. L.P. gas is a dry, gaseous fuel in abundant supply. It burns cleaner, cooler and at a slower, more uniform rate than gasoline. Some vehicles operate on a single fuel, while bi-fuel vehicles can switch between gasoline and an alternative fuel like ethanol. Flexible-fuel vehicles have one fuel system and use a mixture of gasoline and alcohol. For example, E-85 is a blend of 85 percent ethanol and 15 percent gasoline. PROS  Cleaner burning than gasoline.  Abundant supplies and low cost. CONS  Limited range.  May require large, special tanks.  Few fueling stations. HYBRIDS  2 Answers To the QuestionHybrids are vehicles that can draw on more than one source of power. The first hybrid concepts shown by auto makers have typically used an internal-combustion engine (usually gasoline-powered, but sometimes diesel) with an electric motor. They fall into two general categories. In a series hybrid, the engine generates electricity that runs the wheels. In a parallel hybrid, two power sources can turn the wheels. The only mass-produced hybrid currently on sale is the Toyota Prius, a small sedan. It is available only in Japan for about $17,000 -- far less than the cost of producing it. A parallel hybrid, the Prius has an electric motor that powers the car up to 12 m. p. h., when gas-engine emissions are highest. Above 12 m. p. h., the car's 1.5-liter gasoline engine starts up and seamlessly becomes the main power source. The electric motor also operates when maximum power is needed, as when climbing a hill. When it is running, the gas engine recharges the batteries, so the Prius does not require an external charger. Toyota is planning to introduce a hybrid, which may not be exactly like the Prius, in the United States within two years. Chrysler, Ford and G.M. have all displayed prototypes of hybrids that could go on sale within a decade. Some European manufacturers are also working on similar concepts. PROS  Reduced emissions.  Higher fuel efficiency. CONS  Higher costs, weight and complexity.  Energy-storing devices may be required.  May require recharging.  Batteries or fuel cells may be needed. FUEL CELLS  A Technology Good to the Last Drop? The hottest new technology, and the focus of considerable research, is the fuel cell. A fuel-cell car runs on electricity produced from the chemical reaction of hydrogen and oxygen. The only byproduct is water. Fuel cells could be used as a vehicle's sole power source, or as one source in a hybrid. Virtually every major manufacturer has a fuel-cell vehicle in the works, but none are likely to reach the market before 2004. Fuel cells have been in laboratories since the 1960's and have been used in space. Daimler-Benz, the parent of Mercedes-Benz, is at the forefront of the development of fuel-cell vehicles, having introduced its first one four years ago. Most recently, Daimler-Benz and Ford announced a venture with the leading fuel-cell maker, Ballard Power Systems, of Vancouver, British Columbia, to begin jointly producing by 2004 as many as 100,000 cars a year. General Motors also has a fuel-cell vehicle in the works, and Toyota has a fuel-cell program. While most companies are developing cells that use hydrogen as their fuel, Chrysler has taken a different approach, in recognition that there is no infrastructure for distributing hydrogen. Chrysler would use gasoline to produce, on board the car, the hydrogen required by the fuel cell. PROS  Extremely efficient.  Byproducts limited to water. CONS  High cost.  Groups of cells excessively large.  No infrastructure for producing, storing or distributing hydrogen.

Folk Art in Old LymeThere is nothing in the world of art quite like early American folk painting. No other school, if it can be called that, is so recognizable, so incisive in its portrait characterizations, so artlessly artful in its simplicity, so reflective of the downright uprighteousness of early American society, and all done by painters who are mostly named ''anonymous.''Thirty-five such paintings by artists from the late 18th through the 19th century, on loan from the collection of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., may be seen at the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme through May 31. Most of the artists were self-taught, many were itinerant, wandering from town to town painting whoever would pay, often pre-painting the figure and filling in the head, hands and some item of interior decoration on site. One or two of the most accomplished, like Edward Hicks, are now famous. The exhibition contains a selection of requisite compositions -- a dignified portrait of an upper-class matron, a scientist in his study with his dog at his feet, a child with a pull-toy, the cozy little houses that New England became famous for, a circus bareback rider, a blacksmith's shop, and so on. Accompanying the antique paintings are works created by self-taught 20th-century artists on loan from a private collection. The museum, open Wednesday through Sunday from 1 to 5 P.M., is at 96 Lyme Street. Admission is $4, or $3 for older adults and free for children under 12. The number for more information is (860) 434-5542. Getting OutdoorsThe New England Orienteering Club is preparing for another season of getting un-lost in the woods. Orienteering is the art of finding one's way in unknown territory by using a map, a compass and a series of checkpoints. Next Sunday the club will offer an event on land surrounding the Metropolitan District Commission Reservoir No. 5, at Farmington Avenue in West Hartford. Beginners are welcome and participants may register and start hiking at any time between 10 A.M. and 1 P.M. Rental compasses and map-reading instructions will be available for beginners and intermediates. A fee of $6 includes the map. To get there, take Interstate 84,Exit 39 to Route 4, which is Farmington Avenue. Go east for two miles to the Metropolitan District Commission gate. Enter the reservoir property and follow red and white O-Meet signs to the parking lot. For more information, the number is (860) 745-7457. Updating Global WarmingSo you thought the weather this winter and spring was strange? If so, you may want to hear a talk on global warming and what the world is doing about it. ''Climate Change After Kyoto: Challenges and Opportunities'' is the title of a free program to be conducted by Fred Krupp, executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund today at 4 P.M. at the New Canaan Library, 151 Main Street. Mr. Krupp led the fund's delegation to the Kyoto accords, which still must be approved by the legislative bodies of the participating countries. He will describe the emissions trading mechanism by which companies and countries that can make more greenhouse gas reductions than required could earn money by selling them to countries and businesses that have difficulty in making cuts in emissions. A lawyer with degrees from Yale and the University of Michigan, Mr. Krupp was a key figure in the passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act. Since he joined the Environmental Defense Fund in 1984 its budget has increased from $3 million to $25 million and membership has grown from 40,000 to 300,000. For more information, the number of the New Canaan Nature Center, sponsor of the talk, is  (203) 966-9577. On the DrumsThe beat of the tom-tom, trap, kettle, or drum-of-choice, is getting louder as all sorts of people are getting into what are called drum circles where they can express themselves, rhythmically speaking. Two workshops on Rhythm Games and Rhythmic Improvisations scheduled today at 1 and 3 P.M. in Weston are typical of such instructional get-togethers. Part of a world music series presented by Randy Brody and Kevin Makarewicz, music teachers who founded Drum-n-Dance in Norwalk, the session will take place at Emmanuel Episcopal Church, 285 Lyons Plains Road. No musical training is necessary. Tuition for the 1 P.M. games is $20 for one adult and one child, with special rates for larger families. Improvisations, at 3 P.M., are for adults only and cost $25. The number is (203) 855-0811 for more information or to register. Remembering the GroupPhoebe Brand Carnovsky, one of the original members of New York's famed Group Theater, will give a talk tomorrow in Stratford about the heady period in the 30's and 40's when the Group was in its heyday. Its directors, Harold Clurman and Elia Kazan, the playwright Clifford Odets, the actors Luther and Stella Adler, John Garfield, and Ms. Carnovsky's husband Morris Carnovsky, lit up the Broadway stage with firecrackling images of real people as opposed to the drawing room comedies and dramas that had prevailed. Ms. Carnovsky, an actress, director, lecturer and teacher now in her 90th year, teaches at the Westport Theater Arts Center in Norwalk. Her talk, titled ''A Discussion of the Group Theater,'' begins at 7:30 P.M. in the Stratford Library, 2203 Main Street. Admission is free but reservations are required by calling (203) 385-4162. Racing in WestportRunners and walkers will be checking in next Sunday from 7 to 8:40 A.M. for the 20th annual Minute Man Race at Compo Beach in Westport. Three events are scheduled: a five-mile race for individuals and teams along the coastline and through Longshore Park; a three-mile noncompetitive walk along the shore, and a one-mile scamper for children and tagalong adults. Ribbons will be bestowed on all finishers under 18, in addition to children's prizes and entertainment. Awards will be made to race winners at the end of the day. In celebration of the race's 20th anniversary, a pasta dinner will be held for runners and their families on Saturday evening at the Westport Women's Club on Imperial Avenue. Registration for the five-mile-walk and the three-mile walk is $15; the scamper fee is $7. Proceeds are to be distributed among charities by the Westport Young Women's League, founder and sponsor of the event. Since its inception in 1956, the league has donated almost $2 million to community organizations. The number for more information is (203) 222-1388. ELEANOR CHARLES

Reminders of the global threat to botanical diversity surround us, but we tend to think of them as disparate events rather than parts of a broad pattern. The forest fires in Indonesia and the Amazon seem unrelated to the spread of purple loosestrife, an invasive wetland plant, across the Northeastern United States. The appearance of a housing development on former oak savanna in California seems unconnected to the destruction of native hemlocks by a parasitic Asian insect called the woolly adelgid. But each of these events yields the same result, the destruction of the plant life on which so much of human life depends, not only for the conversion of sunlight into food but also for many medicines and chemical compounds. The progressive loss of biodiversity has been well chronicled. Still, last week's report from the World Conservation Union -- the first worldwide assessment of plant endangerment -- was disheartening. Despite repeated promises from world governments to make things better, the report notes, one of every eight plants in the world, and one of every three in the United States, is threatened with extinction. In raw numbers, that means nearly 34,000 species are threatened, which itself is surely an underestimate because reporting is far less detailed in some countries than in others, and because so many plant species remain unidentified and their status thus unknown. According to the conservation union -- a coalition of scientific and environmental groups, including the New York Botanical Garden and the Smithsonian Institution -- the main threats to plant diversity are development, including logging and agriculture, and the invasion of non-native species that crowd out the native brand. That, too, was already known, if not in quite so much detail. The big unknown is whether governments are prepared to do anything about it. The Earth Summit in Rio de Janiero in 1992 approved a biological diversity treaty aimed at reducing the rate of extinction of plant species. The treaty asked each nation to inventory biological resources and adopt a national conservation strategy. Few have done so. But 160 countries have at least ratified the treaty. The United States has not, largely because of Congressional fears that the treaty would allow others to meddle in America's natural resource policy or involve the United States in expensive projects to help poorer nations. Foot-dragging by the world's richest nation has done nothing to encourage others to get involved in the biodiversity issue. There have been plenty of valiant private initiatives. To name one among many, the National Cancer Institute has guaranteed Malaysia part of the profits of any drug obtained from the Malaysian rain forests, a modest incentive to save those forests and the biological treasures within them. But given the sheer scale of the problem -- one-third of the forests that existed 50 years ago, for example, have now disappeared -- government involvement seems an absolute necessity, requiring the same commitment that led to the global warming treaty in Kyoto, Japan, last fall. Regrettably, the world does not seem to have the capacity to tackle more than one ecological crisis at a time.

JOEL GORDES, an energy consultant, believes that Connecticut's multibillion-dollar insurance industry has a choice: face possible financial ruin from losses due to more frequent and severe storms, droughts and wildfires or commit some of the industry's considerable resources to efforts to stem global warming. Mr. Gordes is a consultant to Dr. Jeremy Leggett, formerly of Greenpeace International, and now of Solar Century in Britain. Dr. Leggett began the discussions about climate change between insurers and environmentalists in Europe. Mr. Gordes now engages in similar  discussions with Connecticut and other United States insurers, proposing products he feels would both increase insurers' bottom lines and reduce emission of climate-changing gases. Mr. Gordes has been involved in energy-related work since 1975, when he was hired by a solar energy company in Waterbury. He was vice chairman of the Connecticut General Assembly's energy committee when he served as a State Representative from 1987 to 1991. A lifelong Connecticut resident, Mr. Gordes, 51, lives in Colebrook. In a recent interview, he discussed global warming and the insurance industry. Following are excerpts from that conversation. Q. Why should the insurance industry be concerned about global warming? A. The insurance industry is based upon stability of weather within certain types of boundaries. There has to be an actuarial experience to be able to say, ''This is what the premium should be for this property in this place.'' If climate is changing, the probability of risk changes, and that's not good. There could be more flooding, hail storms, intense wind storms, intense precipitation events. Some recent research from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration says that climate change may make hurricanes worse. Brushfires could become urban firestorms if they come off the ridges and go into Los Angeles. It's going to be erratic and volatile, and that's not a great situation to base insurance premiums on. Q. What is the magnitude of losses from these kinds of events? A. If Hurricane Andrew had hit a more populated and wealthy area, like Miami, it would have been a $50 billion loss rather than the $16.5 billion loss it was. If a similar event hit metropolitan New York, New Jersey and then went into Connecticut, it could be as much as $110 billion. Q. Have insurance losses been increasing in the 1990's? A. Of the 25 largest weather-related insurance losses in the United States, 21 have occurred in the past decade. There has been a remarkable increase in billion-dollar catastrophic losses. Two primary reasons are greater wealth and people building more in harm's way. However, even when you normalize for that, it appears there are other factors at work. Q. With all the uncertainty involved in projecting the future of global climate, why should the insurance companies take this seriously? A. Absence of certainty does not mean absence of risk. If you wake up at the end of the day and say, ''What if I'm wrong, what if there really is climate change?'' it may be too late by then to do anything about it. The insurance industry is the first in line to be bankrupt if climate change is real. Q. What should the insurance industry do about climate change? A. European insurers usually have staff climatologists on board. The United States industry, with the exception of Employers Reinsurance of Kansas, generally does not. They need to start looking at the probabilities of what could happen.  Then they can ask what they can do to help mitigate climate change that at the same time will increase their bottom line -- for instance, making their own facilities more energy efficient. They own tremendous amounts of property. It will make it lower cost to maintain, at the same time they are reducing emissions. The other thing is reducing property-casualty losses through energy types of upgrades. A few winters ago we had all the huge icicles, called ice dams, forming along the edges of roofs. They are caused by heat escaping from poorly insulated ceilings, melting the snow on the roof from below, the water running down over the unheated eaves, refreezing, working its way back under the shingles and causing water damage inside the home. Insulating the ceiling correctly and ventilating the air above it stops ice dams. So here's a case where saving energy, which is saving emissions, saves future claims for the insurance industry. The insurance industry could say, ''We're going to give you 10 percent off your insurance for three years, if you will insulate your ceiling.''Q. Did the insurance industry have a presence at the December global  warming conference in Kyoto? A. The European and Asian insurers certainly did, and they came out with some very, very strong statements calling for emission reductions. Even as far back as 1995, Lloyd's of London, Munich Reinsurance and Swiss Reinsurance were calling for reductions. The American industry has not been there. Seventy-one insurers have signed a United Nations accord, pledging to  consider the issues of climate change and other environmental problems in all business practices. Employers Reinsurance is the only United States company to sign. Q. Have the European and Asian insurers been involved in encouraging energy efficiency? A. They've gone even further. They've started to invest in renewable energy. Swiss Reinsurance has put money into a fund to help people in the third world with photovoltaics. There are a number of English insurers joining the campaign called Solar Century. Q. Why can't insurance companies simply not insure vulnerable areas instead of trying to mitigate global warming? A. Then you don't have much of a business. And you are going to have to have the insurer of last resort take over, which is usually the government. In the long run that usually doesn't work too well. Somebody has to pay somewhere. If you're an insurer, you calculate the risks and do your business. There are a lot of other tools they are developing to manage those risks, financial tools mostly, but that ignores what may be the biggest threat. Q. Why can't insurance companies simply raise their rates as their response to global warming? A. They have been doing that -- in Florida, in certain other prone areas. But remember, it's a regulated business, and the minute you start raising rates, people start squawking to  their state senators and representatives and insurance commissioners.  It's a politically driven process. Q. Are there precedents for the insurance industry advocating social policy changes that would reduce risks? A. Absolutely. What about the support they've given to Mothers Against Drunk Driving? What about seat belt safety and air bag safety? In one case they took some pension funds and invested them in businesses that created jobs for union members from whose pension funds the money came. Why should insurance companies, if there is a solid link to climate change from fossil fuel emissions, be investing in fossil fuel projects? It's like a health insurance company investing in tobacco. Q. What has been the response of United States insurance executives to your arguments? A. They are, as insurers usually are, very cautious. They want to see more ironclad links before they begin to take action. However, a few are starting to make some statements, one that will be putting something in their annual report. We've come up with certain reasons why the United States insurers have not followed in the footsteps of the European Community. The Europeans have more global exposure to losses. The Europeans do not have a massive disinformation campaign going on by their fossil fuel industry, as we do. United States companies don't want to scare their stockholders and customers by saying climate change is imminent. Many also sell auto insurance. And one of the things we're going to have to do, if we want to stop emissions, is get a lot of people out of their autos. Q. How important is this issue for Connecticut? A. Connecticut's economy is still heavily invested in the insurance industry. Some statements were made by Republican State Chairman Chris DePino about how Democratic Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's support for climate change legislation and the Kyoto treaty holds a risk for him. I don't think the Republican chairman has reckoned with the threat that climate change could present to the insurance industry in his home state. So I think he's barking up the  wrong tree.

The National Academy of Sciences has taken the extraordinary step of disassociating itself from a statement and petition circulated by one of its former presidents that attack the scientific conclusions underlying international efforts to control emissions of industrial waste gases believed to cause global warming. The petition, which its backers say has been signed by 15,000 scientists, calls for the Government to reject the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty imposing limits on emissions of gases like carbon dioxide that was negotiated by more than 150 countries in Kyoto, Japan, last December. The petition was accompanied by what appeared to be the report of a scientific study concluding that emissions of carbon dioxide, the principal greenhouse gas, pose no climatic threat and instead amount to ''a wonderful and unexpected gift from the Industrial Revolution.'' The article was attached to a letter by Dr. Frederick Seitz, a past president of the academy and president emeritus of Rockefeller University, urging people to sign the petition and calling attention to the article. Many atmospheric scientists and ecologists who believe global warming to be a serious threat had expressed anger and alarm over the article because it was printed in a format and type face similar to that of the academy's own journal, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. In his letter, Dr. Seitz, a longtime skeptic on the question of global warming, also identified himself as a past academy president. On Monday, citing ''confusion'' created by the petition and the unpublished article, the Council of the Academy, its governing board, disassociated itself from them and said in a statement that the petition ''does not reflect the conclusion of expert reports of the academy.''The eight-page article accompanying the petition was described by its authors as a review of research literature on global warming. It concluded that ''predictions of harmful climatic effects due to future increases in minor greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide are in error and do not conform to current experimental knowledge.'' It cited increased plant growth stimulated by atmospheric carbon dioxide as a benefit. Many scientists believe that global temperatures are rising because increasing levels of carbon monoxide and other man-made gases will trap and retain heat from the sun in a process similar to what happens in a greenhouse. They say this warming trend could cause sea levels to rise and severely disrupt the earth's climate and biological system. Dr. Bruce Alberts, the president of the academy, said he had received a number of telephone calls from influential members of Congress about the academy's association with the petition and the article. The ''clear message,'' Dr. Alberts said, was that ''people are confused.'' So the academy's governing council, in its statement on Monday, said that the petition had ''nothing to do'' with the academy and that the article was never published in the academy's journal. It also noted that the most recent academy report on global warming, in 1991, concluded that ''greenhouse warming poses a potential threat sufficient to merit prompt responses.'' This is in line with the most authoritative assessment of the question, by a panel of scientists advising the United Nations, which predicted in 1995 that the next century would bring widespread climatic dislocations if the greenhouse effect was not restrained. Dr. Arthur B. Robinson, the leading author of the article circulated with Dr. Seitz's letter, said it had been submitted for review by other scientists and for publication in a scientific journal but had not yet been published. Dr. Robinson said he ''never intended to imply'' that the academy endorsed it. He also said that he ''just wanted to put it into familiar format,'' and that he liked the academy journal's format. He noted that nowhere did the article say it was endorsed by the academy or published by its journal. Dr. Seitz, a physicist who was president of the academy in the 1960's, said, ''It's true; the academy was not involved.'' He also said he had urged the authors of the Robinson paper to  ''withdraw it'' and submit it to a journal for publication. Dr. Robinson is a physical chemist at the Oregon Institute of Science and Medicine in Cave Junction, Ore.., In an interview, Dr. Robinson described the institute as ''very small,'' and said its research was ''devoted mostly to the study of biochemistry.''He said the article was circulated before it was published because the delay and copyright considerations would have prevented it from being used in petition drive. Of the 15,000 signers of the petition, Dr. Robinson said, about 2,100 were physicists, geophysicists, climatologists and meteorologists, ''and of those the greatest number are physicists.''

President Clinton today announced a Government-industry initiative to reduce the gases that contribute to global warming by making homes in the United States more fuel-efficient. The goal of the program is to cut household energy use in new homes by 50 percent by 2010 through better windows and insulation, energy-saving appliances and more efficient heating and cooling systems. The plan would also help owners of 15 million existing homes cut their energy use by 30 percent by 2010. The program needs little new money, relying instead on existing tax credits and Federal research money to help spur the development and use of more efficient building technology. The plan is part of the Administration's five-year, $6.3 billion proposal to help the United States reach greenhouse gas emission targets set at the environmental conference in December in Kyoto, Japan. That plan faces stiff opposition from business groups and Republicans in Congress, many of whom believe the alarms over global warming are overblown and think the proposed solutions will cost businesses billions of dollars and will slow economic growth. Speaking at a San Fernando Valley site where 186 energy-efficient homes are to be built, the President said that there was ''virtual unanimity'' among scientists that greenhouse gas emissions were rising at a dangerous rate. He said that while vehicles and industry account for two-thirds of global warming, residential housing contributes 20 percent of the total emissions. The President said the new program, the Partnership for Advancing Technology in Housing, or PATH, would save consumers as much as $11 billion a year in home energy costs and reduce annual carbon emissions by 24 million tons. That represents about 5 percent of annual carbon emissions in the United States, officials said.''It will be the most ambitious effort ever to help private home builders and homeowners make cost-effective, energy-saving decisions that will pay big dividends throughout the 21st century,'' Mr. Clinton said. Earlier today, Mr. Clinton spoke against a California ballot initiative that would limit unions' ability to use dues from members for contributions to candidates or other political activities. The proposal would require unions, as well as corporations, to get employees' consent in writing each year to use payroll deductions or union dues for political action. Republicans in Congress argue that such a requirement should be part of any Federal campaign finance legislation. But since little appears to be happening in Washington, opponents of unions' political spending are pushing the issue in several states. The California measure, Proposition 226, is backed by business groups and Republican politicians, including Gov. Pete Wilson. It also has support from union members, according to California polls. The Clinton Administration and labor leaders oppose the measure, saying it would limit the ability of unions to match business groups' political spending.''This is just an attempt to put unions at a disadvantage to other organized groups in the political marketplace and thereby to diminish the voice of working men and women,'' Mr. Clinton said at a breakfast to raise money to fight the measure. Mr. Clinton returns to Washington tonight, after a stop in Chicago to raise money for the re-election campaign of Senator Carol Moseley-Braun, Democrat of Illinois.

With millions of dollars from a charitable foundation known for its environmentalism and with endorsements from some of the nation's biggest corporations, a former State Department official who helped negotiate the climate-change treaty is mounting a new campaign for action to head off global warming. Eileen Claussen, who as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for environmental affairs helped develop the climate protocol approved at an international conference last December in Kyoto, Japan, said today that she would run a policy center that would seek to lend ''a credible voice'' to the debate on global warming. Pew Charitable Trusts gave Ms. Claussen a $5 million annual grant for the project. Already, treaty opponents financed by industry and treaty supporters from the environmental movement are spending millions of dollars each year in a debate over climate change that is sometimes fraught with exaggeration and even outright distortion of the science and economics of the issue.''It's a big grant, it's a big bet and it's a big problem,'' said Rebecca Rimel, Pew's president. ''There is probably no bigger issue facing the country and the globe, and the time to act is now, because the longer we procrastinate, the bigger the problem grows.''Besides the Pew financing, about half of which will be spent on advertising, Ms. Claussen won endorsements from a group of large companies with annual revenues in the hundreds of billions of dollars. Their support is meant to signal divisions within big business over the effect of climate-control measures that opponents say could wreck the economy by forcing deep cuts in the use of fossil fuels. Next week, the new Pew Center on Climate Change will publish an advertisement festooned with the corporate logos of its supporting companies, which include the aerospace giants Boeing and Lockheed-Martin, the Japanese auto maker Toyota, the appliance manufacturers Maytag and Whirlpool, the diversified conglomerates United Technologies and 3M, and several big energy companies: British Petroleum, Sun Oil, American Electric Power, U.S. Generating Company and Enron. The companies are not contributing financially to the new center, but they are promising to seek ways to reduce their own emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide and to invest in new, more efficient products and technologies. The advertisement says that these companies ''accept the views of most scientists that enough is known about the science and environmental impacts of climate change for us to take actions to address its consequences.''A major tenet of some industry groups fighting the Kyoto treaty is that too little scientific evidence has been accumulated to justify the treaty's call for deep reductions in emissions of gases that trap the sun's heat like in a greenhouse. Automobile and energy companies have been among the treaty's biggest opponents. Ms. Claussen's group does not explicitly endorse the Kyoto pact, but sees it as ''a first step.'' It has called for more work to put into effect the emissions trading schemes and participation by developing countries that the treaty's negotiators plan to work out later this year. The Clinton Administration has said there must be progress on these issues before it agrees to sign the treaty.

The catalytic converter, an invention that has sharply reduced smog from cars, has now become a significant and growing cause of global warming, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. Hailed as a miracle by Detroit auto makers even today, catalytic converters have been reducing smog for 20 years. The converters break down compounds of nitrogen and oxygen from car exhaust that can combine with hydrocarbons, also from cars, and be cooked by sunlight into smog. But researchers have suspected for years that the converters sometimes rearrange the nitrogen-oxygen compounds to form nitrous oxide, known as laughing gas. And nitrous oxide is more than 300 times more potent than carbon dioxide, the most common of the gases that trap heat and warm the atmosphere like in a greenhouse, experts say. This spring, the E.P.A. published a study estimating that nitrous oxide now accounts for about 7.2 percent of the gases that cause global warming. Cars and trucks, most fitted with catalytic converters, produce nearly half of that nitrous oxide, the study said. The E.P.A. has not proposed a solution at this point. Other sources of nitrous oxide include everything from nitrogen-based fertilizer to manure from farm animals. The E.P.A.'s study also showed that nitrous oxide is one of a few gases for which emissions are increasing rapidly. The gases are collectively known as greenhouse gases. The increase in nitrous oxide, the study notes, stems from the growth in the number of miles traveled by cars that have catalytic converters. And the problem has worsened as improvements in the converters, changes that have eliminated more of the nitrogen-oxygen compounds that cause smog, have conversely produced more nitrous oxide. Wylie J. Barbour, an E.P.A. official who worked on the recently published study, said the problem created by the converter was classic: ''You've got people trying to solve one problem, and as is not uncommon, they've created another.''Nitrous oxide, or N2 O, is not regulated because the Clean Air Act was written in 1970 to control smog, not global warming. And no regulations exist to control greenhouse gases. The United States and the other industrialized nations agreed in Kyoto, Japan, last December to lower emissions of greenhouse gases to 5 percent below 1990 levels, over the next 10 to 15 years, but the agreement has not been approved by the Senate and no implementing rules have been written.''This hadn't really been on people's radar screen until climate change started becoming an issue,'' said one E.P.A. official involved in reducing pollution from cars, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Auto industry experts say they can solve the problem by tinkering with the catalytic converter, but some environmentalists suggest that the growing production of nitrous oxide is yet another reason to move away from gasoline-powered cars. The E.P.A.'s study estimated that nitrous oxide may represent about one-sixth of the global warming effect that results from gasoline use. Precisely how much nitrous oxide the converters produce remains an issue. A report used by the E.P.A. in preparing its greenhouse gas study calculated that a car with a fuel economy of about 19 miles a gallon would produce 0.27 grams of nitrous oxide per mile. That represents an amount that is about one-third the emissions for nitrogen oxide, the chemicals causing smog. Steven H. Cadle, a research scientist at General Motors, said, ''it's a huge number.'' In contrast, an older car without a catalytic converter produces much larger amounts of nitrogen oxides, but only about a tenth as much nitrous oxide, the greenhouse gas. The E.P.A. calculated that production of nitrous oxide from vehicles rose by nearly 50 percent between 1990 and 1996 as older cars without converters have neared extinction. Using a standard unit of measure for global-warming gases, millions of metric tons of carbon equivalent, nitrous oxide emissions rose to 54.7 million tons from 36.7 million during those years, the study said. The contradictory impact of the converter has not been lost on environmental officials or industry experts, who continue to debate the extent of the growing problem as well as how to reduce the emissions in future years. Ned Sullivan, head of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, said the converter problem requires a ''comprehensive'' response. ''This specific issue fits into a broader context that our regulatory system has tended to deal with pollutants on an individual, rather than a comprehensive, basis,'' he said. Mr. Sullivan and others favor moving away from today's typical car design, a big gasoline engine driving the wheels, to electric cars. Another  solution is hybrid cars, which use small, efficient engines running on gasoline to help turn the wheels and to charge batteries for electric motors that also run the wheels. Those have much higher fuel economy, and thus lower greenhouse gas emissions. But car industry experts favor less drastic changes. They propose cutting nitrous oxide production by adjusting catalytic converters. They believe that redesigning the converters to reach optimum temperature faster would solve the problem and would also help them destroy other pollutants better. Correction:  June 2, 1998, Tuesday  A front-page headline on Friday about the contribution of automobiles' catalytic converters to global warming misstated the amount of nitrous oxide that the Environmental Protection Agency believes comes from the devices. A draft study by the E.P.A. said that about 3 percent comes from cars and trucks, out of a total contribution of 7 percent from all manmade sources. Cars and trucks alone do not account for 7 percent. In a statement issued yesterday in response to the article, the E.P.A. said the production of the gas by converters ''could be closer to 2 percent or less.''Correction: June 2, 1998, TuesdayA front-page headline on Friday about the contribution of automobiles' catalytic converters to global warming misstated the amount of nitrous oxide that the Environmental Protection Agency believes comes from the devices. A draft study by the E.P.A. said that about 3 percent comes from cars and trucks, out of a total contribution of 7 percent from all manmade sources. Cars and trucks alone do not account for 7 percent. In a statement issued yesterday in response to the article, the E.P.A. said the production of the gas by converters ''could be closer to 2 percent or less.''<br>

The White House will announce today that according to an analysis by Government scientists, El Nino joined the Earth's continuing overall warming trend to break global temperature records in each of the first five months of 1998. Last year, the average surface temperature of the Earth was the highest recorded since people began measuring it with thermometers in the mid-19th century. The new information not only extended the record-breaking pattern, it did so to a degree that the scientists described as unprecedented. Moreover, said the scientists, global warming appears to be exacerbating the effects of El Nino, which have included droughts in some places and heavy rains in others.''We set temperature records in every month since January, and it appears that this general warming trend is making the effects of El Nino worse,'' Vice President Al Gore said in a statement issued by the White House. ''This is a reminder once again that global warming is real and that unless we act we can expect more extreme weather in the years ahead.''Mr. Gore was to present the findings at the White House this morning, with the scientists who performed the climatic analysis. An Administration official said Mr. Gore was trying to tell Congress that it is urgent to enact a $6.3 billion, five-year program of financial incentives and technological research aimed at cutting emissions of heat-trapping industrial-waste gases like carbon dioxide, which is produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil. The measure is facing slow going on Capitol Hill, partly because of resistance on the issue from some parts of the fossil fuel industry and its allies in Congress. In one sense, the temperature findings are not new. Surface temperature records have been set several times in the 1990's, and mainstream scientists have said for some time that emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are probably at least partly responsible. But the year-to-year changes until now have been tiny, measured in increments of hundredths of a degree. This time, the global average for January through May jumped half a degree from the same period a year earlier. In the last months of 1997 and the first months of 1998, the natural warming of the Pacific Ocean known as El Nino was responsible for much of the increase in temperature, scientists have said all along. El Nino has faded, drastically so in the last three weeks, so it is questionable whether the records will hold up for the rest of 1998. The second half of the year ''is not likely to be as warm as the first part,'' said Dr. Kevin Trenberth, a climate scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., who studies El Nino and global warming but did not participate in the new analysis. Still, he said, 1998 ''could turn out to be a record year, easily.''The January-through-May temperature jump was called ''really rather spectacular'' by Thomas R. Karl, senior scientist at the National Climatic Data Center in Asheville, N.C., who was in charge of the analysis. ''To see every month breaking the record is rather significant.'' The first reaction of most meteorologists to a graph of the trend, he said, would probably be ''scratching the head and saying something must be wrong with the data.'' But he said that surface readings and those taken by different instruments on two Earth satellites show the trend, ''so we're very confident that 1998 far exceeds anything we've seen before.''For the five months as a whole, according to the Federal analysis, the average global surface temperature was 1.76 degrees above an average of 61.7 degrees for the bench-mark period of 1961 to 1990. The picture is partly explained and partly muddied by El Nino. On one hand, the exceptionally warm sea-surface temperatures in the tropical Pacific that are characteristic of El Nino are said by scientists to warm the globe generally. On the other hand, it is hard to know to what extent El Nino is responsible for the 1997-98 acceleration of global warming. But Mr. Karl noted that in 1997-98, the average global temperature was nearly a degree higher than the 1961 to 1990 average. This is twice as much above the bench mark as in 1982-83, when an equally strong edition of El Nino dominated the climate. If global warming is responsible for the extra heat, Mr. Karl said, then it is probably exacerbating the regional climatic effects that El Nino brought home so clearly over the last fall and winter: Wildfires, droughts and heavy rains. These ''are going to become more frequent in the future'' if global temperatures continue to increase as predicted, Mr. Karl said. A panel of scientists advising the United Nations has predicted that the average surface temperature of the Earth will rise by 2 to 6 degrees by the end of the next century, with a best estimate of 3.5 degrees, if greenhouse gas emissions are not reduced. This, they said, will disrupt the Earth's climate, causing climatic and agricultural zones to shift, increasing precipitation, making droughts more severe and forcing the sea level to rise. By comparison with the projected 3.5-degree increase, the Earth is 5 to 9 degrees warmer now than it was in the depths of the last Ice Age some 20,000 years ago. Last December, in Kyoto, Japan, more than 150 nations agreed to a diplomatic protocol under which industrialized countries were to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases by about 5 percent from 1990 levels by about 2010. The Kyoto Protocol, as it is called, is widely viewed as a first step in cutting the emissions. Delegates are meeting in Bonn in preliminary talks on details of the protocol. Dr. Trenberth said that the temperature increase in the first five months of 1998 is all the more remarkable because the warmth is well above an average that was already high because it included the effects of a global warming of about  1 degree over the preceding century. As for El Nino, its fading in recent weeks portends a more active hurricane season in the Atlantic, Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico, several scientists have said. One of El Nino's effects is to suppress the formation of hurricanes in the Atlantic and Caribbean, and, consequently, last year was a year of relatively little hurricane activity. Dr. William Gray, a hurricane expert at Colorado State University, issues annual forecasts for the Atlantic basin. His latest forecast, made last week, called for an average frequency of hurricanes this year. It  called for six hurricanes, two of them major. It did not predict when and where they would develop, and whether they would make landfall. But Dr. Trenberth said the hurricane season may be more active than normal, for two reasons: El Nino is gone, and the tropical Atlantic is unusually warm, which favors hurricane development.

Congressional opponents of a treaty to fight the threat of global warming are using the annual spending bills now before Congress to send a blunt message to the Clinton Administration: Don't even think about how to meet the treaty's goals before it wins Senate approval. As a House committee drafted a bill today to finance the Environmental Protection Agency, the treaty's foes won language warning that the money was not to be used ''for the purpose of implementation, or in contemplation of implementation, of the Kyoto Protocol.''The international pact, negotiated in Japan last year and supported by the Administration, is opposed by industries including oil, coal, automobile and public utilities, and faces an uphill fight in the Senate. The treaty's opponents in the House want to bar the Environmental Protection Agency from even holding seminars on the need to cut emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide. Administration officials warned that the E.P.A. spending bill might be vetoed, because of differences with Congress over climate policies, along with other objections to bill, which also finances housing programs, veterans' programs and others. The House Appropriations Committee fended off efforts today by Democrats to modify the disputed language. But the legislation still faces consideration by the full House and Senate. The disputed provisions were inserted by a subcommittee last week at the urging of Representative Joe Knollenberg, a Republican from the suburbs of Detroit. Treaty opponents have seized every opportunity to challenge the Administration. Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, recently objected when the E.P.A. paid for a study on limiting greenhouse gases through a system of trading emissions credits. The study, he said in a letter to E.P.A. Administrator Carol M. Browner, assumed that the Kyoto protocol would be ratified. The Kyoto treaty calls for industrial nations to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, with the United States cutting 1990 levels by 7 percent over the next 10 or 15 years. Last year, United States emissions of carbon dioxide were about 10 percent higher than in 1990. The treaty is strongly opposed by the automobile industry and coal producers, among other industries. The Administration, faced with powerful opposition, has said it will not ask the Senate to approve the deal until further negotiations establish rules for participation by developing nations and for trading emissions-reduction credits among nations. Meanwhile, the Administration's opponents in Congress have cut spending requests for existing programs, like energy conservation. The House spending bill would cut the E.P.A.'s request for climate-related programs by $106 million. The committee report accompanying the House bill said that the bill is intended to prohibit implementation of the protocol ''in any manner'' before it is approved by the Senate. The legislation prohibits any spending ''to develop, propose, or issue rules, regulations, decrees, or orders for the purpose of implementation, or in contemplation of implementation, of the Kyoto Protocol.''Administration officials said that might prevent them from setting energy-efficiency standards, encouraging industries to take such measures, or finding ways to give credit to companies that reduce emissions before the treaty becomes binding. The committee's report ordered the E.P.A. and the White House Council on Environmental Quality ''to refrain from conducting educational outreach or informational seminars on policies underlying the Kyoto Protocol until, or unless, the Protocol is ratified by the Senate.''The agencies, the report said, ''may be engaging in activity that is tantamount to lobbying in an effort to build public support for implementation of the Protocol.'' The language in the reports is usually not binding but carries weight with agencies.

Is the Temperature Rising? The Uncertain Science of Global Warming. By S. George Philander. Illustrated. 262 pp. Princeton, N.J.:Princeton University Press. $29.95. Climate of FearWhy We Shouldn't WorryAbout Global Warming. By Thomas Gale Moore. Illustrated. 175 pp. Washington:Cato Institute. $18.95. A secret of science is that its luminaries have always done the easiest things first, contrary to many claims and myths. Newton ignored the messiness of the real world. His gravitational law showed that two planetary bodies could grip each other invisibly. But his mathematical rigor failed to account for the mutual attractions of three bodies, like the earth, moon and sun. That took the efforts of many successors. Exploring problems of even greater complexity, Lavoisier, and then Mendeleev, helped reveal scores of chemical elements and their odd, recurring similarities. Darwin and Mendel shed light on the tangle of life. And in our own time, scientists are addressing such riddles as the substructure of the atom, the fate of the universe and the workings of the human brain. Which brings us to climate change, one of the knottiest scientific problems of all. What we lightly call the climate system is actually trillions of variables in flux over billions of years. The factors include wind, rain, ice, clouds, snow, storms, lightning, comets, asteroids, sunlight, land size, sea currents, magnetic fields, cosmic rays, volcanic dust and life itself. In ages past, the atmosphere had little oxygen. But plants arose and changed that. The only constant seems to be variability, as suggested by the planet's erratic cycles of cold and warmth. Can this turmoil be fathomed and its evolutionary path forecast? More important for world leaders, can we distinguish the natural changes in meteorological conditions from those induced by humans? Scientists face the riot of variables only with the help of vast simplifications and the world's most powerful computers. To complicate matters, the field itself is in transition as the science improves and experts grow in number. Climate change was once viewed as slow. But recent studies have disclosed past temperature swings so sudden that in theory New England could have Miami-like weather in as little as 25 years. On the other hand, methane, seen as a major spur to global warming, now appears to be accumulating in the atmosphere more slowly than predicted, seeming to reduce the risk of crisis. Moreover, conflicting data are often communicated to the public by environmental zealots at either end of the political spectrum, obscuring things still further. Into this wilderness comes S. George Philander, a geoscientist at Princeton who writes with skill and cool reserve. ''Is the Temperature Rising? The Uncertain Science of Global Warming'' is a careful, step-by-step look at confusing data and clarifying science. He is literate, quoting Shelley, Coleridge and Eliot. And he is reasonably sure we are digging our own grave, though he says so with such understatement that it is easy to overlook the doom and gloom. Rather adroitly, Philander explains why scientists worry about the global rash of fires, generating plants and factories that release carbon dioxide at a furious pace. When sunlight bathes the earth and reflects back into the sky as heat, he says, the radiations have ''so little energy that they are unable to interact with the diatomic molecules that account for most of the atmosphere.'' Such bypassed molecules are mainly pairs of oxygen atoms and pairs of nitrogen atoms. The trouble arises when the weak radiations are absorbed by triatomic and other complex gases, including carbon dioxide, ozone, methane and water vapor. These trap heat in the atmosphere, much like glass in a greenhouse. The question is whether the heat is rising and how much. To address that puzzle, Philander examines issues such as those raised by clouds. If greenhouse heat evaporates some of the sea and increases water vapor in the atmosphere, the planet may grow hotter still, since the mist is a major greenhouse gas. But, he adds, if the added vapor condenses widely, the earth may cool, since white, fluffy, abundant clouds reflect more sunlight back into space. An added twist is that individual clouds heat or cool the earth depending on their exact form. Clouds, Philander says, are the main wild card in the warming game. Driving the point home, he asks readers to imagine computer simulations ''as whimsical as clouds!''The book's science is clear but formidable. We meet latent heat, quantum theory, the photoelectric effect, the hydrological cycle and plate tectonics, some explained better than others. Equations dot the text and pervade 13 appendixes. Many illustrations aid comprehension. But they, too, tend to be esoteric, with temperatures, for instance, always given in the Celsius scale. Like a windy but stimulating uncle, Philander also takes us on detours, some tedious. Who cares why water is a poor thermometer fluid? But what fun to learn that weather experts around the globe release 700 balloons every noon and midnight Greenwich mean time and share the resulting data, friend and foe alike. People, he observes, are ''more truly united in this activity than any other.''For all its detail, the book makes no mention of such current research topics as the extent to which the air is warmed by the sun's variable brightness, newly discovered in the 11-year sunspot cycle and suspected to occur over longer periods. Nor does it adequately explore whether terrestrial reactions to atmospheric upsets can curb greenhouse warming. ''The carbon cycle amounts to a thermostat that keeps temperatures in a moderate range,'' it says provocatively, missing the obvious follow-up. At the book's close, Philander draws together some of his strands and concludes that humankind is playing with fire. The problem, he concedes, is ''enormously complex.'' But the balance of evidence, he warns, suggests that serious problems lie ahead unless we take drastic steps to curtail the buildup of greenhouse gases: ''The growth is exponential, a dangerous situation that calls for action long before there is clear evidence of impending trouble.''Thomas Gale Moore, an economist at the Hoover Institution in California, rejects such alarm. ''Climate of Fear: Why We Shouldn't Worry About Global Warming'' argues that any rise in temperatures is likely to help Americans, if not poor people in the tropics. Moore's optimism is similar to that of Svante August Arrhenius, the Swedish chemist who late in the 19th century first proposed that rises in industrial gases might produce ''ages with more equable and better climates.'' Of the greenhouse idea itself, however, Moore is skeptical: ''The theory is weak and the models on which the conclusions are based cannot even replicate the current climate.'' For the sake of argument, he nonetheless assumes that moderate warming may occur, and he explores possible costs and benefits. First, he reviews the growing literature on past climes and concludes that warm ones favored humans. For instance, balmy weather 800 to 1,200 years ago allowed people in Britain, Prussia and Norway to grow grapes and make wine. ''Mankind prospered during warm periods and suffered during cold ones,'' he writes. He then looks at global warming in the next century. He faults doomsayers as exaggerating woes and ignoring benefits. In sports, he says, pessimists see declines in skiing but overlook rises in golf, camping, tennis, canoeing, hiking and bicycling. His own tally for the United States from global warming estimates annual costs of $6 billion from such things as smog, wetland loss, hurricane damage and new dikes needed to hold back rising seas. On the plus side, he finds $99 billion in benefits from saved lives, improved health, new recreational and life-style amenities, lower heating bills, new construction and added water supplies. He ends with an analysis of the costs of greenhouse curbs like those spelled out in the recent accords reached in Kyoto, Japan, and judges them staggering and silly. Moore, who was a member of President Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers, concludes that ''the best strategy is to maintain the status quo, continue research on climate and help poor countries improve their economies.''Economics, perhaps no less than climatology and other disciplines that probe complexity, has a hard time foreseeing change. Its subject matter, after all, is people, whose behavior is famously at odds with expert prediction. Moore may be as unrealistic as the prophets of doom, perhaps more so. The truth is that we all live in a great climate experiment, the outcome of which, good or bad, no one is likely to forecast with any certitude. William J. Broad is a science reporter for The New York Times and author of ''The Universe Below: Discovering the Secrets of the Deep Sea.''

Paying other countries to cut their pollution could be the cheapest way for the United States to help control the heat-trapping gases that cause global warming, the Clinton Administration said in a new economic analysis released today. A system of buying and selling pollution permits internationally, as proposed by the Administration, would cut the costs to the United States at least in half and possibly by as much as 85 percent, according to a study by the White House Council of Economic Advisers. Many economists favor the trading of pollution permits as a free-market mechanism that reduces the costs of pollution controls.''The world is filled with unbelievably cheap opportunities to reduce emissions abroad,'' said Janet Yellin, President Clinton's top economic adviser. The study was intended to substantiate Ms. Yellin's recent testimony before Congress that the United States could meet the targets of a new international climate change protocol, negotiated last year in Kyoto, Japan, at a modest cost. She has estimated that the typical household's annual energy bill might rise as little as $70 per year, although others insist the amount would be far higher. With the Senate balking at approving any treaty that does not include a substantial role for developing countries in the control of emissions, the Administration has struggled for more than a year to produce a comprehensive analysis of its proposals. The study released today was attacked by critics on several sides of the climate debate. Connie Holmes, the chairwoman of the Global Climate Coalition, a group representing large companies that oppose the treaty, called the report ''smoke and mirrors.'' The Administration, Ms. Holmes said, had not faced up to the fact that many foreign nations oppose the idea of pollution trading. Representative John D. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat who opposes the global warming treaty, said the report ''gives every appearance of being a post hoc rationalization, full of tautologies and self-fulfilling, unrealistic or unprovable assertions and assumptions.''Some environmental groups strongly criticized the Administration, saying the study suggested that the United States, which emits more heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide than any other country, is seeking to avoid much of its responsibility for solving the problem of climate change.''Their plan is to buy reductions abroad,'' said Gary Cook, legislative director for the climate campaign at Greenpeace. ''We need to take the first steps largely at home.''The Administration's study was based on sophisticated computerized economic models, including one developed by the Battelle Laboratory in Ohio to estimate the economic costs of actions to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide, the principal heat-trapping gas produced when fossil fuels are burned. The models suggested that the United States could meet its emissions targets, which require reductions of 7 percent below the 1990 level over the next 10 to 15 years, at an annual cost of $7 billion to $12 billion. Energy prices would increase by amounts equivalent to about 5 cents per gallon of gasoline, according to these projections. The models suggested that about one-fourth of the reductions in emissions would actually be accomplished within the United States. The rest of the reductions would be bought from other countries that were cutting emissions more than the treaty required, and therefore had surplus pollution permits to sell. Ms. Yellin and Todd Stern, the White House's senior aide on climate issues, said today that these projections underestimated how much the Administration's policies would reduce emissions at home. Ms. Yellin said the model did not take into account any of several initiatives the Administration favors to reduce domestic emissions of carbon dioxide. Among these are elements of its proposal to restructure the electric utility industry, to provide tax incentives for energy-saving investments, and to subsidize research into new technologies like solar power and fuel-efficient automobiles.

The political debate on global warming, long dominated by arguments over science and economics, is spilling over into pulpits and pews as religious organizations speak out about morality, faith and the Kyoto Protocol. Major church groups in the United States are mounting an unusually broad and active campaign to persuade the Senate to approve the protocol, an international agreement to fight climate change that was negotiated in Japan last year, leaders of the effort say. Many Protestant, Greek Orthodox and Jewish groups, including black churches and some evangelicals, have joined the campaign, although Roman Catholic bishops are still considering their stance on global warming and some of the nation's more conservative Christian groups, like the Southern Baptist Convention, are not participating. In a letter to President Clinton and the senators, 22 member churches of the National Council of Churches pledged to work for approval of the Kyoto Protocol, calling it ''an important move toward protecting God's children and God's creation.''The Kyoto treaty calls on developed countries to make deep cuts in emissions of heat-trapping gases like the carbon dioxide that comes from burning fossil fuels, with the United States reducing 1990 levels by 7 percent over the next 10 to 15 years. The Rev. Joan Brown Campbell, the council's general secretary, said the group wanted the climate issue to be ''a litmus test for the faith community.'' Ms. Brown said the churches would demand that the United States lead the way on fighting global warming without requiring actions by the developing world, a condition the Senate has already set. And in an unusual grass-roots campaign, an interfaith coalition, the National Religious Partnership for the Environment, plans to have members of the clergy and lay lobbyists focus on senators from nine states that stretch from Appalachia across the Midwest. The states include West Virginia and Michigan, where the coal and auto industries are powerful opponents of the treaty. Some of the region's senators, like Richard G. Lugar of Indiana and Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, both Republicans, are considered especially influential in the climate debate. In October, the churches will bring together about 100 people in Columbus, Ohio, to coordinate the advocacy work in congregations across the region, organizers say.''This is two parts ground swell and one part mobilization,'' said Paul Gorman, the executive director of the religious partnership. ''This is really about the future of religious life itself.''Kim Winchell of Freeland, Mich., a medical laboratory technician who coordinates about 32 Michigan Lutheran congregations on environmental issues, said, ''I plan to network, network, network and pray a lot.''Susan Harlow of Indianapolis, a seminarian who works with youth groups through the Church of Christ, said she was called to environmental causes during a course in prophetic ministry, which she defined as ''speaking the hard truth, speaking out on issues that people would rather not deal with.''The Rev. Christopher Bender of the Assumption Greek Orthodox Church in Morgantown, W.Va., said his efforts on climate change ''really have a long way to go.''''Given the fact that we live in West Virginia, the first step is just to get the subject on the table,'' Father Bender said. ''Perhaps over the course of time we can also change hearts and minds.''The campaign on climate issues reflects a determination among churches in the past decade to involve the faithful more directly in matters like the disproportionate effects of pollution on poor people or the need to save endangered species. When Pope John Paul II delivered his ''Ecological Crisis'' message in 1989, he said industrial nations could not demand that the third world set restrictive environmental standards without doing so first themselves. Like other religious leaders, Catholic officials said they viewed global warming as a moral issue with profound importance for the world's poor, who stand to suffer most from disruptions to the climate. But they said it would take time for American bishops to consider where they stand on the treaty's specifics. Two committees are considering the issue. John Carr, secretary of the department of social development at the United States Catholic Conference, said the bishops ''understand there is a lot at stake here, and want to think our way through this.''At times, the convergence of religion and environmentalism has cast secular environmentalists and believers in unfamiliar roles. At a conference last year in Santa Barbara, Calif., it was hard to say which was more notable: the pronouncement by Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew, the Eastern Orthodox Christian leader, that polluting was a sin, or the public apology by Carl Pope, the executive director of the Sierra Club, for the rejection of religion by his generation of environmentalists. Some participants said they expected resistance to the injection of morality into the climate debate.''I don't believe that there is a consensus in the country that it is a moral issue,'' said Mark Jacobs, director of the Coalition on the Environment and Jewish Life. The coalition, which brings together 26 national Jewish organizations spanning the spectrum from Reform to Orthodox, is participating in the campaign.''Many people don't believe we have an obligation to curtail our life style to protect future generations,'' Mr. Jacobs said. The discussion in religious circles on global warming can be just as complex as the parallel debates in economic and scientific circles.''There is considerable debate in the scientific community on the whole issue of global warming, enough to learn that working scientists are not monolithic on the question,'' said William Merrell, a spokesman for the Southern Baptist Convention. ''The convention itself has not taken a position, and in view of the unsettled science, it seems unlikely that we will take such a position.''The National Association of Evangelicals has also largely stayed away from environmental issues, although it is planning a conference to discuss them next March.

INTERNATIONAL  A2-6Terror Threat Closes U.S. Embassy in Albania  The State Department said it had shut down routine operations at the American Embassy in Albania because of ''recent declarations by Islamic extremists against the United States.'' The department ordered some embassy employees to leave Albania and warned Americans not to travel there.  A6Slow Rebuilding in Nairobi  Reconstruction has begun in Nairobi at the site of the blast, with cost estimates in the hundreds of millions of dollars. Big businesses have been immobilized, and small ones may be bankrupted, because insurers refuse to cover the losses. President Daniel arap Moi, whose ruling circle is widely viewed as corrupt, may act as a barrier to further outside aid. A6Iraq's Nuclear Plans Detailed  An Iraqi scientist who defected to the United States has publicly described the inner workings of Iraq's three-decade effort to build a nuclear bomb. He said he had trained scientists to resume Iraq's atomic weapons program quickly if the United Nations cut back on its inspections and lifted economic sanctions.  A1After Baghdad suspended cooperation with United Nations inspectors earlier this month, the United States and Britain urged the chairman of the inspectors, Richard Butler, not to confront Iraq by trying to conduct a surprise inspection, officials said.  A5Rush to Leave Congo Capital  Thousands fled the Congolese city of Kinshasa, after almost every major Western country called for its citizens to leave. Electricity was restored to the city after a 24-hour interruption, but there was increasing uncertainty that the Government would be able to ward off approaching rebel forces.  A3Russia's Markets on Upswing  Russia's financial markets rallied after the Kremlin and major Western powers indicated that they were working on more plans to end the nation's economic crisis. President Boris N. Yeltsin said there would be no devaluation of the ruble.  A2Myanmar Deports Foreigners  Eighteen foreigners, including six Americans, were sentenced to five years of hard labor for handing out pro-democracy leaflets in Myanmar, but the Government immediately deported them, on the condition that they not violate Myanmar laws again. The 18 foreigners arrived in Bangkok today, many of them met by weeping relatives. (Associated Press) Rights Review for East Timor  The United Nations and Indonesia signed an agreement to allow human rights observers access to East Timor. The region has endured civil unrest, guerrilla warfare and rights abuses since Indonesia invaded in 1975 and annexed it early the next year. The United Nations is brokering peace talks with Indonesia and Portugal, the territory's former colonial master, on East Timor's future.  (Associated Press) NATIONAL A7-11, 14Court Strips F.D.A. Of Power Over Tobacco  A Federal appeals court in Virginia ruled that the F.D.A. did not have the authority to regulate cigarettes or smokeless tobacco. The ruling was a setback to anti-smoking groups, state attorneys general and members of Congress who had used the threat of Federal regulation to press the industry to reimburse states for the health costs of smoking, to limit advertising and to stop the marketing of cigarettes to teen-agers. A1Clinton Prepares for Monday  President Clinton has virtually cleared his calendar this weekend to prepare for his grand jury testimony in the Monica S. Lewinsky investigation on Monday afternoon. But he will not decide whether to give a public address to the country until he finishes answering prosecutors' questions on closed-circuit television, White House officials said. New details of Ms. Lewinsky's grand jury testimony emerged that could complicate Mr. Clinton's predicament. Ms. Lewinsky told jurors last week that she had performed sex orally and manually on the President on several occasions, lawyers said. A8Facing questioning under oath about his private life and with impeachment proceedings tuning up in the wings, Mr. Clinton has almost no one he can turn to for advice, say friends and current and former advisers. A1A distillation of two recent polls. A8A Rejection of Vouchers  A Federal judge has ruled that three Maine families whose small town does not have a public high school may not use public money to send their children to religious schools. A7Balloonist Nears Australia  Steve Fossett threaded his balloon through an atmospheric minefield with the help of meteorologists on the ground and approached the west coast of Australia, completing nearly half of his attempted round-the-world flight. A10Churches Press Climate Pact  Major church groups in the United States are mounting an unusually broad and active campaign to persuade the Senate to approve the Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement to fight global warming that was negotiated in Japan last year, leaders of the effort say. A10NEW YORK/REGION B1-5Mayor Pressing Ahead With Methadone Changes  Mayor Giuliani has decided that heroin addicts treated at city hospitals will typically be allowed to get methadone for no more than three months, health officials said. The policy change, which will occur in about 60 days, affects 2,000 addicts. A1Labor Dispute Hinders Rites  A four-month labor dispute at eight Jewish cemeteries in Queens and Brooklyn and on Long Island has left hundreds of mourners unable to dedicate gravestones of relatives and friends, as Jewish custom dictates, because monument company workers refuse to cross the picket lines of cemetery workers. B1Brokerage to Build Tower  Morgan Stanley Dean Witter was said to have agreed to build and occupy a one-million-square-foot office tower on Seventh Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets. B1Big Raise in Store for Crew  Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew would be paid $245,000 a year, more than any other top school administrator in the country -- as well as President Clinton -- under a new contract. B3Tenants Give Up Their Fight  Five elderly tenants who have battled developers' efforts to build a 31-story condominium tower on the site of their Regency-style apartments on the Upper East Side have agreed to a settlement and will move out. B3Prisoner Dead in the Hudson  A convicted thief recently charged in three killings kicked out the side window of a police van, hobbled in shackles to the edge of a bridge in Rensselaer County and leapt 65 feet to his death in the rocky shallows of the Hudson River, officials said. The 43-year-old thief had just been sentenced to 24 months in prison for violating probation. B5SPORTS C1-8ARTS & IDEAS B7-16Best Books List, Reconsidered  The Modern Library, faced with widespread criticism of its list of the century's 100 best English-language novels, will significantly change the way it compiles a similar list of nonfiction books later this year. B7BUSINESS DAY D1-14Rates Drop as Stocks Fall  Long-term Treasury rates fell to their lowest level in 30 years -- 5.54 percent on the 30-year Treasury bond -- but stocks continued to slide. The S.& P. 500 is down more than 10 percent from its high, the Wall Street definition of a correction. The Nasdaq and the Russell 2000 have already fallen more than 10 percent, and the Dow, which dropped 34.50 points, to 8,425, is just points away. D1The Government in Hong Kong confirmed it had intervened to shore up stock and futures markets by taking the rare step of dipping into its reserves to buy shares and futures contracts because it thought currency traders were improperly manipulating the financial markets. D1Partners See Shares Plunge  Shares of two makers of telecommunications equipment, Ciena and Tellabs, partners in a pending $7.1 billion merger, plunged after Ciena said its third-quarter profits would be less than half of expectations. The chief executive of Tellabs said the merger would proceed. D1Business Digest D1OBITUARIES D16  Chalmers P. Wylie  The 26-year Congressman from Ohio, who was instrumental in the savings-and-loan bailout, was 77. D16EDITORIAL A12-13Editorials: Canada's noble gesture; toll phobia and America's Interstates; the tribulations of Afghanistan; power, electric and electoral. Columns: Frank Rich, Thomas L. Friedman. Bridge B12Weather D15Crossword B12

Setting a figure for the first time on its planned reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, the British Petroleum Company announced today a ''firm overall target'' to cut emissions by 10 percent of their 1990 levels by 2010. A spokesman for the company in London, Roddy Kennedy, said the 1990 level of emissions was 40 million tons -- a figure that would have risen by 18 million tons over the next 12 years if no measures were taken to reduce them. The target reduction was announced in a speech to the Yale School of Management in New Haven by Sir John Browne, British Petroleum's chief executive, who said the promised cuts went deeper than those promised by industrialized countries last year. Greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide and other pollutants that many think cause global warming. Last December, 160 countries agreed in Kyoto, Japan, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in industrialized countries by 5 percent between 2008 and 2012. But, according to environmentalists, the agreement has met with strong resistance from oil and other companies and has not been ratified. Many people in the United States energy sector argue that global warming is unproved. Breaking ranks with other oil producers, however, Sir John first called for action to limit greenhouse gases last year, pledging to set a target for reductions. He said today that the company would undertake the cuts ''in transparent ways so the reduction can be measured and verified by outside observers.''''For the oil and gas industry, the dominant issue of public policy is climate change,'' Sir John said, according to a text of his address provided here. ''Of course, the science of climate change is not proven. The science is provisional and perhaps always will be. But there is mounting evidence that the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is rising and the temperature of the earth's surface is increasing.''Accordingly, he said, B.P. has initiated an internal program enabling units within the company to trade emission rights -- a system developed with the Environmental Defense Fund, a nonprofit advocacy group in the United States, and also urged by the Kyoto conference. Trading in emission rights lets companies or countries reduce greenhouse gas emissions either by outright cuts or by trading in excess reductions made by others. In a separate statement, B.P. said a pilot trading program would link 12 of its 90 internal units accounting for about a quarter of the company's emissions. In London, Mr. Kennedy, the spokesman, declined to comment on how today's pledge would affect B.P.'s planned merger with Amoco, announced in August and still awaiting regulatory approval. Amoco has differed with B.P. on global warming, but Sir John said today that ''as our business grows, we will incorporate new activities into the base line of our calculation and into the target.''One way B.P. has begun to reduce emissions, he said, is by cutting the number of pumping stations on the Trans-Alaska pipeline and by reducing flaring -- the burning-off of waste gas -- by two-thirds. He said future reductions would come from technological advances, more efficient energy use and less flaring. Fred Krupp, the executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund, which cooperated with B.P. in setting up its emission-trading system, called today's announcement ''a really magnificent example of a corporation acting responsibly.''While B.P.'s emissions represented a small percentage of global emissions, he said, B.P. had ''set up a whole new level of expectations for other corporations within the oil and gas industry'' and had committed itself to ''do more than the Kyoto protocol requires independently of whether it ever goes into effect.''''It's small in percentage terms,'' Mr. Krupp said in a telephone interview. ''It's more significant because of its signal. I believe this changes the whole ball game.''INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS

A coalition of business, labor and farm groups called the Global Climate Information Project has been sponsoring two television commercials for the last month opposing an agreement reached in Kyoto, Japan, last December to reduce emissions of industrial waste gases believed to cause global warming. One commercial is a 30-second spot called ''In Common.''PRODUCER -- Goddard ClaussenON THE SCREEN -- A pair of scissors slices developing countries like India, Algeria, Thailand, Mexico and Brazil out of the world map. In a broader shot, the entire third world dissolves to white. THE SCRIPT -- Female voice: The United Nations climate treaty cuts 134 countries out of the picture. Together, these countries' greenhouse gas emissions are growing five times faster than the rest of the world's, and the U.N.'s treaty will allow them to produce even more. So while America and a few other countries are forced to drastically cut energy use, countries like China, India and Mexico will continue to produce even more emissions. This U.N. treaty isn't global, and it won't work. ACCURACY -- All 175 countries that have ratified the 1992 United Nations climate treaty are obligated, in general, to control emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide, which is produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil. But 39 industrialized nations including the United States, meeting in Kyoto, added a provision to the treaty that requires them to make specific cuts in emissions totaling about 5 percent below 1990 levels during the next 10 to 14 years. These 39 countries now produce most of the world's greenhouse emissions, even though poorer countries' emissions are growing and may exceed those of the richer countries in a decade or two. The poorer countries, arguing that the rich countries got wealthy by burning fossil fuels, have long refused to bind themselves to specific cuts until the richer countries lead the way. It is not clear that the Kyoto accord would require America to cut energy use drastically; many experts believe that eliminating energy waste by using fuel more efficiently would go far toward achieving the cuts. SCORECARD -- Many of the commercial's sponsors fear that they would be hurt by action to reduce emissions, and they are trying to convince viewers that the Kyoto agreement would be unfair and costly to Americans. The American Automobile Manufacturers Association took the lead in organizing the campaign, according to Karen Kerrigan, the sponsoring coalition's chairwoman. Among the reasons why the spot is running now, she said, are these: Delegates from around the world are to meet in Buenos Aires in November to try to work out details of the Kyoto accord. The Kyoto agreement must still be approved by the Senate. (It has not yet been submitted by the White House.) And the Clinton Administration has recently been lobbying for urgent action to control emissions in the face of rising global temperatures. WILLIAM K. STEVENSTHE AD CAMPAIGN

THOSE living on the coast are in trouble,'' George Abar said after watching Southampton Beach being washed away in a hurricane. It was only a computer-generated video, prepared by Mr. Abar's organization, the National Environmental Trust in Washington, to illustrate what could happen if global warming causes a three-foot rise in sea levels. When combined with a 10-foot storm surge from a Category Two hurricane, like the one that struck the Gulf Coast last week and others that have hit Long Island several times in this century, Southampton Beach would be all but destroyed. Mr. Abar said his organization prepared the video to ''try to take abstract notions and make them compelling. As they say, a picture is worth a thousand words.''According to a scenario accepted by many (but by no means all) scientists, a three-foot sea-level rise would not occur for at least a century. But the National Environmental Trust, a Washington-based private group, argues that to avoid future catastrophe, action must be taken now to reduce emissions of so-called greenhouse gases, produced mostly by burning fossil fuels. Many climatologists fear that these gases will raise global temperatures, causing a partial melting of the polar icecaps and raising sea levels worldwide.''Some sea-level rise is inevitable because of pollution now in our atmosphere,'' Mr. Abar said. ''The question is, are we going to respond to these changes?''Mr. Abar said he would like to see the United States adopt the agreement reached last year by 160 nations in Kyoto, Japan, in which the major industrialized nations are required by the years 2008 to 2012 to cut greenhouse gas emissions by an average of 5.2 percent below 1990 levels. Adoption of the treaty by the United States is stalled in Congress by critics who argue that the cost of compliance outweighs the uncertain benefits. Mr. Abar said Southampton was chosen for this study because of its high profile and concentration of expensive beachfront real estate. But the 29-page report accompanying the video made clear that the impact of rising sea levels would be felt Island-wide. In 100 years, it said, the South Fork could be split into at least three sections; Jones Beach, Fire Island, the Hamptons beaches and Pikes Beach could all be under water; the coastlines in Bayville, Asharoken, Huntington Bay and the Great South Bay could be littered with the ruins of docks, seawalls and homes, and countless inland backyards in places like Middle Island and Yaphank could be at greater risk of flooding because of a rising water table.''Global warming,'' the report said, ''threatens to spell the end of much of what we know Long Island has to offer, washing it away by rising seas and destroying for the future the Island's historic past.''The video was created using an overlay of detailed pictures from the National Aerial Photography Program and elevation data from the United States Geological Survey. Using the elevation data of Southampton Beach, the computer digitally replaced land with water. Other factors, including changes in patterns of tidal scouring and other forms of erosion, were not taken into account, and Mr. Abar warned that the computer-generated images should not be used to predict the fate of any single piece of property. As presented by the report, however, the overall trend seemed ominous. Others were skeptical of the report. Candace Crandall, a policy research associate with the Science and Environmental Policy Project of Fairfax, Va., assailed the study, describing the National Environmental Trust as ''a propaganda mill, not a research organization.''''They are out to promote global warming as a scare across the country,'' she said. ''That's what they are doing, so I take all of what they are saying with a grain of salt.''Ms. Crandall said that the estimate of a three-foot rise in sea level is based on the worst-case scenario presented in a 1996 report by the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. This was the panel's third report on the issue in this decade, she said, and each one forecast a smaller rise in temperature and sea level.''The problem is shrinking into nothing,'' she said. ''I'm seeing more and more scientists who are acknowledging that there is considerable dispute'' about the impact of global warming. Her group's research, Ms. Crandall said, appears to indicate that global warming is occurring, but that it will increase evaporation, which will fall as snow and ice on polar areas and thereby lower the sea level. ''There seems to be an indication that the evaporation-precipitation factor may be the greater effect,'' she said. But Vivien M. Gornitz, a climate expert who joined Mr. Abar at a briefing on the study, said there is no doubt that global warming will push the sea level higher by a ''couple of inches in 30 years. In the worst-case scenario, it would increase by eight inches. Major floods that used to occur every 100 years could occur once every 30 years.''Dr. Gornitz asserted that what is needed is better coordination between agencies in developing coastal policy.''What is going on on Long Island is absolute chaos in terms of coastal management,'' said Dr. Gornitz, a scientist at Columbia University's Center for Climate Systems Research and NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies. ''There is no management whatsoever. Whoever has the most political and economic clout gets his way.''Such conflict was evident early this year when neighbors objected to the erection of a 175-foot steel bulkhead in front of the home of Ronald and Isobel Konecky in Bridgehampton. Southampton Town called the work illegal. When the town later held a public hearing on a proposed six-month moratorium against the erection of bulkheads, more than 100 people showed up to protest. The Konecky case flared just a week after a reported $1 million erosion-control project failed to protect the oceanfront home of their neighbor, William Rudin. The project had consisted of oversized sandbags that were placed in a semicircle in front of the Rudin house. One of the consultants on the project blamed vandalism -- a knife slash in one of the sandbags -- for leaving the system vulnerable to an Atlantic storm the night of Jan. 28. But Robert S. DeLuca, president of the Group for the South Fork, scoffed at that assertion, saying: ''If you can bring down a million-dollar structure with a pocket knife, you probably shouldn't have built it in the first place.''Mr. DeLuca, who also attended the National Environmental Trust's briefing last week, said there are $10 billion worth of second home investments on the East End. But even those who do not own beachfront property use the beach, he said, and ''if the beach disappears from erosion, it will be a less attractive area to live.''The National Environmental Trust study said the ''state's coastal economy is its lifeblood. Anti-environmental rhetoric is filled with assertions about how much it will cost to stop global warming. This report speculates on what it will cost to lose our natural resources.''The report said that in 1996, tourism on the Island, much of it shore-related, employed about 152,000 people, 14 percent of the Island's jobs. Chief among the lures of Southampton, it said, is the town's sandy, white beach, more than 20 miles long.''Unfortunately,'' it said, ''that beach is eroding at an average of 1.7 feet per year and is facing extinction from the very forces that created it, plus something else: the melting of polar glaciers and the hydrologic thermal expansion brought on by global warming.''Southampton Town and Southampton Village are now both developing coastal studies, and Mr. DeLuca said he will press to have global warming included as a factor in long-term planning on the South Fork. Mr. DeLuca said his organization advocates the development of a post-storm recovery plan to determine how and what should be built along the beachfront. And he said there should be a buyout program for those who have lost 80 percent of their homes to soil erosion and the sea. Mr. Abar offered one lesson to shorefront homebuyers: ''Don't take a 30-year mortgage on a home that may be gone in 30 years.''

The Energy Department's official forecasting arm has produced an extraordinarily pessimistic forecast of steeply rising energy prices if the United States fights global warming by clamping down on emissions of heat-trapping gases that come from burning fossil fuels. Under various outcomes, the forecasting arm, the Energy Information Administration, projected gasoline prices would rise to $1.39 to $1.91 a gallon, and electricity prices would rise 20 percent to 86 percent by 2010. Natural gas prices would rise significantly, and coal prices would soar, the forecast said. Under an international agreement negotiated last year in Kyoto, Japan, the United States would have to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases significantly in 10 to 15 years. But the treaty is in trouble in Congress, where opponents often say it would wreck the economy. The Energy Department's forecast is sharply at odds with the Clinton Administration's previous assertions that the United States can meet the targets set by the treaty without significant economic disruption. The forecast is to be presented on Friday at a Congressional hearing. The new study plays directly into the hands of treaty opponents, but those who favor the treaty said it is deeply flawed. Energy conservation advocates said the forecast, produced using the Energy Information Administration's standard economic models, had relied on absurd assumptions and improper analysis to reach ridiculous conclusions.''This is one of the most flawed, biased, intellectually dishonest analyses ever produced by an supposedly unbiased analytical organization,'' said Joseph J. Romm, a former Assistant Energy Secretary. Mr. Romm is an expert on energy technologies like solar power and conservation that would help control greenhouse gas emissions. He and other critics said the study discounted many of the policies, like tax incentives and research subsidies, that the Administration had proposed for enforcing the treaty if the Senate approved it. They said it used computer models that were unreliable for long-term forecasting. They said it did not account for the lower costs that would result from a key feature of the Administration's climate change policy: international emissions trading, which would allow the United States to meet the treaty's targets largely by paying other countries to reduce their output of greenhouse gases. Critics also said the forecast assumed that businesses would be slow to adopt new energy technologies although, under the forecast's own projections, the costs of not acting would be high. Many such computer models have been used for projecting the costs of the Kyoto agreement protocol on climate change. Because so much depends on the assumptions of the models, their predictions may not be reliable. And critics noted that the Energy Department had a long track record of making bad predictions about long-range trends in energy prices and pollution control costs. Even so, the new study is certain to fuel criticism of the treaty. The study is scheduled to be presented on Friday at a hearing of the House Science Committee, whose chairman, Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., a Wisconsin Republican, is a leading critic of the treaty. The study's projections of the costs of controlling the emissions of greenhouse gases are significantly greater than the predictions of several similar studies, even the gloomy forecasts paid for by industry opponents of the treaty that predicted extraordinary costs. And it predicts that the costs would be much higher than predicted by Janet L. Yellen, chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, in a study released in July. Eileen Claussen, a former senior State Department official who helped negotiate the Kyoto agreement, said that just as Dr. Yellen's analysis was wildly optimistic, this one was wildly pessimistic.''Both of these forecasts are totally unrealistic,'' Ms. Claussen said. ''It is the most bizarre thing. They haven't put out a single bit of analytical work on the costs that has any credibility at all.''Ms. Claussen now directs the Pew Center on Climate Change, which has drawn together major corporations pledging early actions to cut their  emissions of greenhouse gases. Mr. Romm, who now consults with businesses on how to cut greenhouse gas emissions, criticized the report's assertions that emerging technologies like solar power and fuel cells would gain little over 20 years although costs of traditional fuels were likely to rise. He ridiculed the study's finding that even with coal prices soaring, power plants would not install any measurable cogeneration equipment, which uses waste heat to generate extra electricity from coal. Although the new study predicts slowing economic growth as a result of higher energy costs, over the long run this amounts to just tens of billions of dollars in an economy that grows to more than $10 trillion.

WeeksThisLastOnWeekWeekListNonfiction1252TUESDAYS WITH MORRIE, by Mitch Albom. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A sportswriter tells of his weekly visits to his old college mentor, who was near death's door.216THE DEATH OF OUTRAGE, by William J. Bennett. (Free Press, $20.) The former Secretary of Education takes a critical view of the Clinton Presidency. (+)334THE TEN COMMANDMENTS, by Laura Schlessinger and Stewart Vogel. (Cliff Street/HarperCollins, $24.) The radio talk-show host and a rabbi discuss the significance of the Ten Commandments in contemporary life.444HIS BRIGHT LIGHT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $25.) The novelist recalls the life of her son Nick Traina, who suffered from manic depression and died at 19.5122LINDBERGH, by A. Scott Berg. (Putnam, $30.) The checkered life of Charles A. Lindbergh.6819A WALK IN THE WOODS, by Bill Bryson. (Broadway, $25.) A journalist hikes the Appalachian Trail.7718A PIRATE LOOKS AT FIFTY, by Jimmy Buffett. (Random House, $24.95.) Traveling from Florida to the Amazon, the singer-songwriter reflects on his life.854HIGH CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS, by Ann H. Coulter. (Regnery, $24.95.) A lawyer states the case for the impeachment of President Clinton.91PURE DRIVEL, by Steve Martin. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Humor pieces by the actor, comedian and writer.10996CONVERSATIONS WITH GOD: Book 1, by Neale Donald Walsch. (Putnam, $19.95.) The author addresses questions of good and evil, guilt and sin.1168THE DAY DIANA DIED, by Christopher Andersen. (Morrow, $27.) An account of the events surrounding the death of the Princess of Wales.12102EAT THE RICH, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The humorist's treatise on economics and the business world.1311109ANGELA'S ASHES, by Frank McCourt. (Scribner, $25.) An Irish-American writer recalls his childhood amid the miseries of Limerick.141424WE ARE OUR MOTHERS' DAUGHTERS, by Cokie Roberts. (Morrow, $19.95.) The television news anchor's personal reflections on women.15153THE PROFESSOR AND THE MADMAN, by Simon Winchester. (HarperCollins, $22.) How a murderer helped compile the Oxford English Dictionary.1626*THE GIFTS OF THE JEWS, by Thomas Cahill. (Talese/ Doubleday, $23.50.) What Western civilization owes an ancient nomadic tribe. WeeksThisLastOnWeekWeekListAdvice, How-to and Miscellaneous1228THE 9 STEPS TO FINANCIAL FREEDOM, by Suze Orman. (Crown, $23.) How to manage your money. (+)213IF LIFE IS A GAME, THESE ARE THE RULES, by Cherie Carter-Scott. (Broadway, $15.) Counsel. (+)3323SUGAR BUSTERS! by H. Leighton Steward et al. (Ballantine, $22.) Losing weight and combating disease. (+)417IN THE MEANTIME, by Iyanla Vanzant. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Ways to find what you truly need, particularly ''the love that you want.'' (+)52*ONE DAY MY SOUL JUST OPENED UP, by Iyanla Vanzant. (Fireside/S&S, $13.) How to raise one's morale and realize one's ambitions. (+)Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending Oct. 3, at almost 4,000 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 50,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders. Expanded rankings are available from The New York Times on the Web: www. nytimes. com/books. And Bear in Mind  (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE AMERICAN CENTURY, by Harold Evans with Gail Buckland and Kevin Baker. (Knopf, $50.) An accessible political history, elegantly and copiously illustrated; it argues that American democratic ideals, however many times they have led to grief for ourselves and others, on balance have made for human rights, here and abroad. DANCING NAKED IN THE MIND FIELD, by Kary Mullis. (Pantheon, $24.) The darkly joyous autobiography of a brilliant chemist (Nobel Prize, 1993) whose views on global warming, H.I.V., the ozone layer and many other issues are either unusual or bizarre (maybe time will tell). EUCALYPTUS, by Murray Bail. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) A magic novel from Australia, in which a homesteader's daughter must marry, fairy tale fashion, the first suitor who can correctly identify every eucalyptus species; a wandering storyteller breaks the rule. EVENING, by Susan Minot. (Knopf, $23.) An elegant, assured novel that tells the story of a woman's life in two narratives: one as she remembers her life, one as she passes from it. THE EVOLUTION OF JANE, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.) A character named Jane and the principles of evolution are both shrewdly rendered in a novel that unconventionally uses large principles to illuminate a particular life. THE FARMING OF BONES, by Edwidge Danticat. (Soho, $23.) A sobering novel by a Haitian-American, set in Hispaniola in 1937 during a bloody eruption of the endless hostility between Haiti and its neighbor, the Dominican Republic. THE GIANT, O'BRIEN, by Hilary Mantel. (Marian Wood/Holt, $22.) An early mad scientist meets a late, unviable, enormous Irish spinner of tales in a novel that grants the future to the scientist but the heart to the bard. I MARRIED A COMMUNIST, by Philip Roth. (Houghton Mifflin, $26.) A tender, harsh, witty novel whose title refers to a bitter, hostile book written by the female half of a ruined marriage (sound familiar?), and whose principal action, recalled in the present, takes place in the dire focus of the age of McCarthyism. LOVE UNDETECTABLE: Notes on Friendship, Sex, and Survival, by Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf, $23.) A meditation, basically religious, on the effects of AIDS in the culture and in individuals, by the former editor of The New Republic. THE VENTRILOQUIST'S TALE, by Pauline Melville. (Bloomsbury USA/St. Martin's, $23.95.) A gleeful fiction that plays the spirit-filled world of South American Indians against the rationalist world of exploitative, ''civilizing'' Europeans in a novel that is in part an act of revenge on Evelyn Waugh for his 1934 novel, ''A Handful of Dust.''WeeksThisLastOnWeekWeekListFiction112BAG OF BONES, by Stephen King. (Scribner, $28.) A series of terrifying events besets a best-selling novelist four years after his wife's sudden death.224THE LOOP, by Nicholas Evans. (Delacorte, $25.95.) A biologist finds herself facing professional and romantic problems while trying to protect wolves in Montana.339RAINBOW SIX, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $27.95.) John Clark, heading an international task force, investigates terrorist incidents in Switzerland, Germany and Spain.4416I KNOW THIS MUCH IS TRUE, by Wally Lamb. (Regan Books/HarperCollins, $27.50.) A troubled man must care for his schizophrenic identical-twin brother and face the nightmares that have bedeviled their family.556TELL ME YOUR DREAMS, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $26.) A series of brutal murders that may involve three young women leads to a bizarre trial.6647MEMOIRS OF A GEISHA, by Arthur Golden. (Knopf, $25.) The life of a young woman growing up in Kyoto who has to reinvent herself after World War II begins.71THE REEF, by Nora Roberts. (Putnam, $23.95.) Searching for a jeweled amulet in the depths of the Caribbean, a woman deals with mysteries and romance.8820SUMMER SISTERS, by Judy Blume. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Two young women from very different backgrounds come of age together on Martha's Vineyard.91BY THE LIGHT OF MY FATHER'S SMILE, by Alice Walker. (Random House, $22.95.) The members of a black American family experience spiritual and sexual enlightenment in the Sierras of Mexico.1074FIELD OF THIRTEEN, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $24.95.) Thirteen stories of suspense that revolve around the world of horse racing.11926MESSAGE IN A BOTTLE, by Nicholas Sparks. (Warner, $20.) After finding a seaborne bottle containing an enigmatic letter, a divorced woman encounters love.121THE HUNDRED DAYS, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $24.) In 1815, Jack Aubrey and Stephen Maturin must intercept a shipment of gold intended to aid Napoleon.131110THE FIRST EAGLE, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $25.) Two Navajo policemen pursue a mysterious killer -- a plague or a person? -- in the Southwest.14152WELCOME TO THE WORLD, BABY GIRL! by Fannie Flagg. (Random House, $25.95.) The pleasures and problems of the rising star of a 1970's television show.15142BIRDS OF AMERICA, by Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $23.) A dozen short stories that center on articulate, erotically frustrated protagonists (usually women). WeeksThisLastOnWeekWeekListNonfiction1252TUESDAYS WITH MORRIE, by Mitch Albom. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A sportswriter tells of his weekly visits to his old college mentor, who was near death's door.216THE DEATH OF OUTRAGE, by William J. Bennett. (Free Press, $20.) The former Secretary of Education takes a critical view of the Clinton Presidency. (+)334THE TEN COMMANDMENTS, by Laura Schlessinger and Stewart Vogel. (Cliff Street/HarperCollins, $24.) The radio talk-show host and a rabbi discuss the significance of the Ten Commandments in contemporary life.444HIS BRIGHT LIGHT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $25.) The novelist recalls the life of her son Nick Traina, who suffered from manic depression and died at 19.5122LINDBERGH, by A. Scott Berg. (Putnam, $30.) The checkered life of Charles A. Lindbergh.6819A WALK IN THE WOODS, by Bill Bryson. (Broadway, $25.) A journalist hikes the Appalachian Trail.7718A PIRATE LOOKS AT FIFTY, by Jimmy Buffett. (Random House, $24.95.) Traveling from Florida to the Amazon, the singer-songwriter reflects on his life.854HIGH CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS, by Ann H. Coulter. (Regnery, $24.95.) A lawyer states the case for the impeachment of President Clinton.91PURE DRIVEL, by Steve Martin. (Hyperion, $19.95.) Humor pieces by the actor, comedian and writer.10996CONVERSATIONS WITH GOD: Book 1, by Neale Donald Walsch. (Putnam, $19.95.) The author addresses questions of good and evil, guilt and sin.1168THE DAY DIANA DIED, by Christopher Andersen. (Morrow, $27.) An account of the events surrounding the death of the Princess of Wales.12102EAT THE RICH, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic Monthly, $24.) The humorist's treatise on economics and the business world.1311109ANGELA'S ASHES, by Frank McCourt. (Scribner, $25.) An Irish-American writer recalls his childhood amid the miseries of Limerick.141424WE ARE OUR MOTHERS' DAUGHTERS, by Cokie Roberts. (Morrow, $19.95.) The television news anchor's personal reflections on women.15153THE PROFESSOR AND THE MADMAN, by Simon Winchester. (HarperCollins, $22.) How a murderer helped compile the Oxford English Dictionary.1626*THE GIFTS OF THE JEWS, by Thomas Cahill. (Talese/ Doubleday, $23.50.) What Western civilization owes an ancient nomadic tribe. WeeksThisLastOnWeekWeekListAdvice, How-to and Miscellaneous1228THE 9 STEPS TO FINANCIAL FREEDOM, by Suze Orman. (Crown, $23.) How to manage your money. (+)213IF LIFE IS A GAME, THESE ARE THE RULES, by Cherie Carter-Scott. (Broadway, $15.) Counsel. (+)3323SUGAR BUSTERS! by H. Leighton Steward et al. (Ballantine, $22.) Losing weight and combating disease. (+)417IN THE MEANTIME, by Iyanla Vanzant. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Ways to find what you truly need, particularly ''the love that you want.'' (+)52*ONE DAY MY SOUL JUST OPENED UP, by Iyanla Vanzant. (Fireside/S&S, $13.) How to raise one's morale and realize one's ambitions. (+)Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending Oct. 3, at almost 4,000 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 50,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (+) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders. Expanded rankings are available from The New York Times on the Web: www. nytimes. com/books. And Bear in Mind  (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE AMERICAN CENTURY, by Harold Evans with Gail Buckland and Kevin Baker. (Knopf, $50.) An accessible political history, elegantly and copiously illustrated; it argues that American democratic ideals, however many times they have led to grief for ourselves and others, on balance have made for human rights, here and abroad. DANCING NAKED IN THE MIND FIELD, by Kary Mullis. (Pantheon, $24.) The darkly joyous autobiography of a brilliant chemist (Nobel Prize, 1993) whose views on global warming, H.I.V., the ozone layer and many other issues are either unusual or bizarre (maybe time will tell). EUCALYPTUS, by Murray Bail. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) A magic novel from Australia, in which a homesteader's daughter must marry, fairy tale fashion, the first suitor who can correctly identify every eucalyptus species; a wandering storyteller breaks the rule. EVENING, by Susan Minot. (Knopf, $23.) An elegant, assured novel that tells the story of a woman's life in two narratives: one as she remembers her life, one as she passes from it. THE EVOLUTION OF JANE, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.) A character named Jane and the principles of evolution are both shrewdly rendered in a novel that unconventionally uses large principles to illuminate a particular life. THE FARMING OF BONES, by Edwidge Danticat. (Soho, $23.) A sobering novel by a Haitian-American, set in Hispaniola in 1937 during a bloody eruption of the endless hostility between Haiti and its neighbor, the Dominican Republic. THE GIANT, O'BRIEN, by Hilary Mantel. (Marian Wood/Holt, $22.) An early mad scientist meets a late, unviable, enormous Irish spinner of tales in a novel that grants the future to the scientist but the heart to the bard. I MARRIED A COMMUNIST, by Philip Roth. (Houghton Mifflin, $26.) A tender, harsh, witty novel whose title refers to a bitter, hostile book written by the female half of a ruined marriage (sound familiar?), and whose principal action, recalled in the present, takes place in the dire focus of the age of McCarthyism. LOVE UNDETECTABLE: Notes on Friendship, Sex, and Survival, by Andrew Sullivan. (Knopf, $23.) A meditation, basically religious, on the effects of AIDS in the culture and in individuals, by the former editor of The New Republic. THE VENTRILOQUIST'S TALE, by Pauline Melville. (Bloomsbury USA/St. Martin's, $23.95.) A gleeful fiction that plays the spirit-filled world of South American Indians against the rationalist world of exploitative, ''civilizing'' Europeans in a novel that is in part an act of revenge on Evelyn Waugh for his 1934 novel, ''A Handful of Dust.''

Twenty-five years after an oil embargo proved that fuel supplies were neither reliable nor endlessly cheap, the United States has given up almost all the gains it made in conserving energy. On average, Americans have returned to consuming nearly as much energy as ever before. From 1973, when Arab oil producers choked off their shipments to the United States, through 1983, the nation reduced its energy consumption even as the population and economy expanded. Prodded by higher costs and led on conservation crusades by Presidents Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, Americans learned to do more with less. That effort is still yielding great benefits. Owners of older buildings and homes installed thicker insulation and tighter windows. As technology improved, every new home, factory and car came with far more efficient appliances, machines and engines than in the 1970's. But energy demand has risen so much since the mid-1980's that, next year, the Energy Department predicts, consumption per person will come to within 2 percent of the peak in 1973, before any of these energy-saving advances had begun. Declining energy prices -- now lower in real terms than before the first embargo -- have made the difference. In the dollar-a-gallon era, why spend much time or money saving a gallon or a watt? Evidence of the more energy-intensive life style is everywhere. Since the early 1970's, as the average household has shrunk by a sixth, the average new home has grown by a third. Even moderately priced homes are now stuffed with energy-hungry features, from central air-conditioning to Jacuzzis and security systems. Look at families like T. C. and Michael McCracken and their year-old daughter, Lydia. The McCrackens, avid hikers, are far more willing than most Americans to shop for energy-saving appliances or ride the bus to work. But here in Arvada, outside Denver, standard features of their nearly completed tract home include ceilings so high that overhead fans, finding a new season and purpose, are required in winter to blow rising heat back down. With 2,600 square feet to fill, Mr. McCracken plans to install a home office, a home theater and a home brewery fed by its own gas line. What Mrs. McCracken calls a ''killer kitchen'' has all the standard appliances and the electrical capacity for more than a dozen others, plus room to seat a family of 10. Energy use is rising even faster on the roads. Next year, Americans are expected to burn more fuel per person than in 1973, before the Government set mileage standards. More families have two earners, and the suburbs continue to sprawl, so Americans are driving more than ever. As for fuel economy, the growing popularity of light trucks -- minivans, sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks -- has begun to reverse two decades of gains. The daily hour to hour and a half that Mrs. McCracken, a personnel manager, has spent commuting and running errands in her Dodge Caravan minivan will stretch by another half-hour once she moves. And Mr. McCracken will put more miles on his sport utility vehicle, an Isuzu Rodeo. Corporate habits are going the same way. Businesses saved more energy than individuals did through the mid-1980's but have used the most extra energy ever since. Chemical producers, among the heaviest energy users, say that in the 1990's they have all but quit making improvements solely to save energy. Electric utilities are cutting reimbursements for installing more efficient heating, cooling, lighting and other equipment at work and at home. Cheap, abundant energy has in fact produced great benefits, fueling an era of rising standards of living and dormant inflation. Lower demand from Asia has pushed oil prices down even further lately, with shortages unlikely for years. Growing energy demand is a natural result. But it conflicts with the nation's declared goals of reducing dependence on imported oil and lowering carbon dioxide emissions, thought to cause global warming. It also requires the nation and its oil companies to spend billions of dollars laying pipelines through unstable regions, building drilling platforms in deep seas and defending foreign supplies. Clearly, the nation relies more than ever on overseas oil. Imports account for a record 50 percent of consumption, up from 35 percent in 1973. Though a rising share comes from secure neighbors like Mexico and Venezuela, the United States still gets about 10 percent of its oil from the Persian Gulf, twice the level in 1973. The rising use of fossil fuels has also raised the atmosphere's level of carbon dioxide. The Clinton Administration pledged at a conference in Kyoto, Japan, last December to cut these emissions. That is not a simple task, said Daniel Yergin, chairman of Cambridge Energy Research Associates. ''Environmental concerns point one way and prices point the other way,'' he said. President Clinton is now striving to put energy efficiency back on the nation's agenda. He asked Congress for $6.3 billion over five years, including $3.6 billion in tax incentives and $2.7 billion for research. Accelerating the introduction of electric cars and other technologies would make energy savings nearly painless, he argues. Administration officials note that improving technology has already allowed Americans to live better with far less energy than they would otherwise use. Since the mid-1980's, however, these advances have slowed. Many corporate executives and members of Congress call global warming a distant peril with uncertain causes. They portray the Administration's plans as a costly threat to the nation's prosperity. They also discount the danger of rising imports, saying that free markets will relieve high prices or tight supplies by promoting increased output and efficiency. In a compromise, Congress allowed $202 million of the $473 million for research this year but nothing for tax incentives. It was 25 years ago this month, and again in late 1978, that vengeful Middle Eastern oil exporters squeezed their supplies to the United States and raised prices worldwide. A nation that was virtually self-sufficient into the 1950's had become a petroleum captive. Gasoline prices soared, lines at the pump stretched beyond frustration and the economy fell into repeated recessions. Americans turned down their thermostats and bought fuel-efficient Hondas, Datsuns and Toyotas. At work, they replaced millions of inefficient motors, lighting fixtures and generators. President Nixon called for a national effort on the scale of the making of the atomic bomb.''Let us set as our national goal,'' he said, ''with the determination of the Manhattan Project, that by the end of this decade we will have developed the potential to meet our own energy needs without depending on any foreign energy source.''President Carter, wearing a sweater in a televised speech to drive home his point, termed energy conservation the equivalent of fighting a war. But traumatic memories of oil shocks have long been soothed by plentiful, low-cost supplies. At about $1 a gallon -- compared with $1.10, adjusting for inflation, in 1973 -- fuel is as cheap as ever. United States gasoline prices remain less than half those in Europe and Japan, where energy is heavily taxed. Americans consume more than twice as much energy per person as Europeans or the Japanese. The Energy Information Administration predicts that, in the absence of efforts to curb growing energy use, carbon emissions from burning fuel will rise 33 percent from 1990 to 2010, while the President has pledged to lower them by 7 percent. The agency's experts scoff at the prospects of meeting that goal unless prices rise significantly.''If you look at our actions rather than words, it's evident we don't care,'' said Dwight K. French, a specialist on consumption trends. ''Only the next crisis will again make conservation a priority. End of discussion.''On the Home Front  More Square Feet And 'Vampires'Here in Arvada, in the subdivisions carved into the sagebrush hills of Denver's suburbs, the McCrackens' new home will have far more efficient heating, air-conditioning and major appliances than the homes of 25 years ago. Modern weatherstripping and vinyl-sealed windows will help keep the Colorado cold out and the heat in. In energy consumption per square foot, the home of the late 1990's is the winner. But not the overall champion. Since the early 1970's, the average size of a new home has risen to 2,100 square feet from 1,600, even as the average household has shrunk to 3 people from 3.6. ''It's almost like the trend to sport utility vehicles,'' said Donn D. Eley, chief financial officer of Village Homes, the McCrackens' builder. ''They can't build them big enough.''Home builders are also bringing to tract homes the expansive features once reserved for mansions. ''Wow factors,'' they are called in the trade. In the $150,000-to-$300,000 range, the confined quarters of yesteryear just won't do. Larger homes with fewer people but more things to plug in have pushed home energy consumption back to the levels of the 1970's. Residential energy consumption per person fell by a tenth from 1973 to 1983 but has since risen about as much. Tighter Federal standards for homes and major appliances promise to save enough energy over the coming years to offset what goes to heat and cool larger homes. But then come the computers, videocassette recorders, dishwashers, clothes washers and dryers that have been using about 5 percent more energy a year since 1990. Early in the next decade, the Energy Department predicts, such appliances will consume even more energy than heating. Many of these devices are always on, ready at the push of a button. Razors and electric toothbrushes have chargers, fax machines are poised to send and receive, televisions and videocassette recorders merely go dormant, not off. Together, these items use more power than a refrigerator. ''They're called vampires,'' said Arthur H. Rosenfeld, a senior adviser for efficiency at the Energy Department. ''They suck electricity.''Central air-conditioning, in less than 40 percent of new homes in 1971, is now in more than 80 percent. Dishwashers have gone from luxuries, found in 19 percent of households in 1970, toward necessities, found in 57 percent as of 1996. The standard ceiling height has risen to nine feet from eight, meaning more space to heat and cool. ''Even though the efficiency of larger homes has improved,'' said Gopal Ahluwalia, research director for the National Association of Home Builders, ''the total volume, the use of glass, the fireplaces and the appliances lead to higher energy consumption. They will not buy a home without these energy-inefficient features.''As Coloradans who believe weekends were made for hiking and cross-country skiing, the McCrackens, trim 31-year-olds, say they would like to live greener. To save water and energy, they plan to pay about $300 extra for a high-efficiency washer and dryer. Mr. McCracken has even joined the declining 5 percent of Americans who ride mass transit -- for him a bus -- to his job as a consultant and programmer for I.B.M.But their new house, like many today, is another story. Join the McCrackens in the Wyndham Park subdivision as they open the door to a 2,600-square-foot model home like the one they are buying nearby for $270,000. A towering entryway and its clerestory windows tilt their gazes upward. The two-story, 21-foot spaces continue on into the living room and the family room.''What I love about this is the high ceilings,'' Mrs. McCracken volunteered. ''I know they are terribly inefficient. But it does make it seem so spacious.''Her husband was nodding as Jack Zelkin, a senior marketing executive with the builder, listed the features. Mr. McCracken was already making plans to take advantage of the upgraded phone, cable and data wiring, for internal video and computer networks, that became standard a year ago, even in homes costing less than $150,000. Saving energy has become a dormant issue, said Mr. Zelkin, who was once an energy-efficiency expert for the local utility.''I'm a tree-hugging, granola-eating, environmental zealot,'' he said. ''But if you give these buyers a choice between a Jacuzzi tub or extra insulation, they'll take the Jacuzzi tub every time.''On the Road  Traveling Farther, And Less EfficientlyAmericans are not only living in spacious new homes. They're also living in their cars. From her home in Lakewood, another Denver suburb, Mrs. McCracken has driven her minivan about 20 minutes to Golden to drop off her daughter at day care. Then it is 10 minutes back to her office in Lakewood, at Harveys Wagon Wheel Hotel/Casino. Or, a couple of times a week, she drives 20 minutes to the casino itself in Central City. After work, Mrs. McCracken reverses the pattern, often adding a stop at the King Soopers grocery store, the Blockbuster video store or the cleaner's. From her new house, it will be 15 minutes more each way, meaning that she will spend up to two hours in the car every day. Tens of millions of T. C. McCrackens who have entered the work force have become a prime factor pushing energy use for travel up 12 percent for each American since 1983, back to the previous peak in 1978. In 1975, only 47 percent of American women with children younger than 18 were working or looking for work. By 1997, it was 72 percent. Many households have almost enough cars to create their own traffic jams. Nearly one in five households has three or more cars, up from about one in 25 in 1969. Commuters of both sexes also live farther from work. The average commuting distance grew by more than a third from 1983 to 1995, to 11.6 miles, even as car-pooling and the use of mass transit declined. While covering more miles, Americans are getting fewer miles per gallon now that they are buying nearly equal numbers of cars and light trucks. Back in 1975, light trucks accounted for only a fifth of sales. Cars are meanwhile becoming more powerful. Auto makers that once concentrated on building leaner, more efficient models have instead been adding the muscle that customers crave. Average horsepower has risen to 156 in 1996 from 99 in 1982 -- and the time needed to zoom from zero to 60 has fallen to 10.7 seconds from 14.4. And as speed limits have increased, those cars are using still more energy. As vice president for operations at A.A.A. Colorado, Vickie W. Stark's job is to encourage travel. But even she decided she was spending too much time behind the wheel. Her husband, a computer network manager, had followed her in assignments from Washington to Florida to Cheyenne, Wyo., where they bought a home north of town. When Ms. Stark got a job in Denver in 1995, he refused to budge. And so Ms. Stark began driving more than two hours each way, or 127 miles, not counting her monthly one-day round trips to each of six offices elsewhere around the state. A few months after she began the long haul from Cheyenne, Ms. Stark made a habit of calling her husband and two children on her car phone just as she was passing the exit for Windsor, Colo., the halfway point. ''If we lived here, I'd be home,'' she always said. In September 1996, they moved again -- to Windsor. As a family, they did not save any driving, but they did redistribute it. Her husband now has a 52-mile trip north, and Ms. Stark a 63-mile trip south. All Ms. Stark has sacrificed by moving are bragging rights to the longest trip to work. Her neighbors next door and just across the street also work in Denver. In the Factory  Energy Conservation A Lower PriorityThree times a week, 100-car trains more than a mile long arrive brimming with coal at the Celanese Ltd. chemical plant near Pampa in the Texas Panhandle. The trains dump their contents into chutes that form a pile 10 stories high. Coal dust dances in the flatland winds. The coal is burned to boil water, providing the heat for producing chemicals like acetic acid, which is used in clothing fibers and plastic parts. The plant also uses enough electricity to power a city of more than 50,000. In one of the most energy-hungry industries, Pampa makes chemicals that are twice as energy intensive per pound as the Celanese average. The plant, which opened in 1952, initially treated energy as if it were as cheap and plentiful as the air. Steam and heat were simply vented. The oil embargoes of the 1970's brought a new outlook. Steam used in one process was rerouted to other processes. As a result, Pampa and other Celanese plants raised their energy efficiency 2 percent to 3 percent a year through the 1980's. But in the 1990's, with lower energy prices reducing the payoffs, they have improved at less than half those rates, if at all. ''The emphasis is simply elsewhere these days,'' said Thomas Parker Jr., managing director for tax policy and energy at the Chemical Manufacturers Association. Across all businesses, industrial and commercial energy use fell 18 percent from 1973 to 1983, then jumped 37 percent by 1997. The growing corporate appetite for energy comes despite the economy's shift from smokestack industries like steelmaking to software and entertainment. Managers in many industries say they achieved the easiest savings long ago. ''We picked the low-hanging fruit first, in the 70's and 80's,'' emphasized Edward E. Quick, the environmental manager for Celanese. ''As we move into the 1990's, we're finding the available technology much more costly.''Amory B. Lovins, whose Rocky Mountain Institute promotes energy efficiency, will hear none of it. He rattles off a half-dozen technologies like computerized controls that he says the chemical plants have failed to adequately exploit. ''When the Celanese guys say you're running out of low-hanging fruit, the only thing I can say, based on the experience of people in this industry, is that the fruit is bushing up around our ankles.''Riley R. Kothmann, who runs the Pampa plant, has some ready answers. His tour includes a room where walls of dials and meters have been succeeded by banks of computer screens and controls. But at times, it seems, fruit from higher branches drops on plant supervisors' heads. Even without reaching for energy savings, they find, the savings often land on them. Compelled by law to contain emissions, Pampa's technicians found that those emissions could go back through a turbine to raise the plant's electricity production by nearly 10 percent. Or there was the time three or four years ago when managers began wrapping insulation around the joints where pipes are bolted together. ''Pampa just had a tradition of not doing it,'' Mr. Kothmann said. ''It's so much easier to continue doing things the way you used to.''To meet the goals of the Kyoto treaty for reducing emissions, Celanese executives say they would have to improve their energy efficiency by 3 percent a year through 2010, or as rapidly as in the 70's and 80's. All the technology they know of cannot meet that goal unless they cut production, said R. David Damron, the company's director for Government affairs. If Washington insists, he said, ''you're going to stifle growth.''Celanese is still hedging. In early June, a company energy committee was assigned to find ways of meeting the goals, whatever the costs. The next step will probably be to find ways of doing the suggested projects at manageable costs. Mr. Kothmann, a member of the committee, recalls that environmental controls expected to cost $800 million a few years ago were delivered for less than $300 million. ''Our experience has shown that we can achieve much more for much less than we anticipated it costing us,'' he said. Energy use is rising in corporate offices as well as plants. Like homes, they have far more efficient heating, lighting and cooling, but also far more electronics. Electric utilities have cut their support for installing more efficient equipment to $1.9 billion in 1996 from $2.7 billion in 1994. They say they cannot afford these programs in the competitive new era of deregulation. Consolidated Edison, which serves New York City and most of Westchester County, cut its efficiency program to $31 million last year from $125 million in 1993 and has now eliminated it. Customers had been rewarded for deeds like installing more efficient appliances and compact fluorescent light bulbs instead of standard incandescents. In its place, Con Ed, with state backing, plans to spend $25 million to $30 million a year on programs including low-cost loans for companies to develop more efficient electrical products and incentives to help them sell these products more cheaply.''For less of an incentive per light bulb, appliance or motor, you can get a lot more in energy savings,'' contended Stephen Pertusiello, the company's program manager for market transformation. But Peter A. Bradford, the chairman of the New York State Public Service Commission from 1987 to 1995, said Con Ed's case was at best uncertain. ''You are replacing a known and proven set of programs with speculation,'' he said. In the Political Arena  Calls for Action Face ChallengesPresidents going back to Richard Nixon have tried to arrest the nation's growing energy use. In the face of the 1973 oil embargo, he urged the nation to turn down its thermostats, form car pools and more. He announced that December that the lights on the national Christmas tree would be kept off. The next month, he signed the Emergency Highway Conservation Act, setting a speed limit of 55 miles an hour. The first fuel-efficiency standards for cars took effect in 1975, requiring the average to double, to 27.5 miles a gallon, over a decade. By 1977, Jimmy Carter was promoting the search for renewable sources of energy like sunlight, wind, wood and wastes. He called his conservation campaign ''the moral equivalent of war.''Then, in 1978 and 1979, another round of production cuts by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, compounding shortages caused by American price controls and regional allocations, brought the gas lines back. More than half the nation's gas stations were closed during the first summer weekend in 1979. As gasoline climbed by 1981 to $2.05 a gallon in today's dollars, the nation began its most successful peacetime conservation effort. Americans used 43 percent less energy for every dollar of gross domestic product in 1986 than at the peak in 1972. From 1987 through last year, energy use per dollar of output declined by only an additional 8 percent. By the mid-1980's, OPEC was in disarray and energy prices had declined. President Ronald Reagan cut back conservation and renewable-energy programs. The rural speed limit was raised to 65 miles an hour. This decade brought a reminder that foreign oilfields have their risks. Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 provoked a stock market selloff and a run-up in energy costs that contributed to the decade's only recession, the third in a row that came after oil supplies were pinched. President Clinton, taking office in 1993, asked Congress to raise taxes on all fuels, including coal, by the equivalent of a dime a gallon. He got 4.3 cents on motor fuels only. In 1995, Congress repealed the national speed limits, and most states set their own at 65, 70 or even 75. Over the last year, President Clinton has sought to make energy efficiency a renewed national priority. But to keep down the costs of reducing emissions, the United States plans to achieve only about a quarter of the required reductions itself. The trading of emissions rights would allow America to pay other nations to achieve the rest. At home, the White House wants to promote advances in electric cars, renewable energy and the like. ''My gut is, we will see the introduction of these new technologies very quickly,'' said Ernest Moniz, the Under Secretary of Energy, whose responsibilities include the efficiency programs. With much of the technology already available, he said, ''We're not waiting for some magic bullet.''Republicans in Congress have portrayed the Kyoto accord as a dangerous effort to shape energy policy by raising false environmental fears. It leaves out developing nations, they say, and by requiring drastic energy savings, it threatens the United States with job losses resulting from much higher costs than the Administration acknowledges. Chuck Hagel, the Nebraska Republican who led the Senate's delegation to Kyoto, says that for all the risks of growing dependence on imported oil, ''The answer is not just to say we're going to lower everybody's standard of living.''In the face of such opposition, President Clinton has not yet sought Senate ratification, saying that he, too, wants to include developing nations. But Europe and Japan are clamoring for the United States to take action, and the Administration has promised to submit the treaty next year. Conservation is now so unpopular that its advocates shun the label. ''Use the term efficiency,'' said Mr. Lovins at his Rocky Mountain Institute headquarters in Old Snowmass, Colo. ''Conservation to a third of Americans means doing less, worse or without. It means privation, discomfort and curtailment.''If the cause of energy conservation has a last, remote redoubt, it is his stone-and-glass compound 7,100 feet high on the western flanks of the Continental Divide. There, he shows off an indoor tropical forest, luxriant with pink and yellow bougainvillea and a banana tree that has yielded 26 crops. Despite temperatures as low as 47 degrees below zero, he has no heating bills and no furnace. Instead, he has triple weatherstripping and heat-trapping windows and walls. Technological efficiencies, or what Mr. Lovins calls negawatts, can capture energy far more cheaply, in his view, than spending billions to build more power plants or produce more oil from remote or politically volatile regions. With energy prices so low, however, some in Washington say that high demand is only a sign that free markets are working in everyone's best interests. ''Those who have an energy fetish argue that saving energy is more important than saving money or time,'' said Fred L. Smith, president of the Competitive Enterprise Institute there. Low energy prices allow more people to afford air-conditioning and cars, he says. ''If we raise the price of energy, we will push some people back onto the buses.''But just as open-heart surgery is far more traumatic than regular exercise and a low-fat diet, other experts say that an abrupt response to another oil shock or environmental crisis could make the earlier discipline of gradual energy savings seem mild. For Joseph J. Romm, who until recently ran the Energy Department's efficiency programs, it is only a question of when the nation will return to conservation, not if. Contending that the world's oil supplies will eventually tighten and temperatures rise, he said, ''Ten years or 15 years from now, people will be desperate to take action.''

Twenty-five years after an oil embargo proved that fuel supplies were neither reliable nor endlessly cheap, the United States has given up almost all the gains it made in conserving energy. On average, Americans have returned to consuming nearly as much energy as ever before. From 1973, when Arab oil producers choked off their shipments to the United States, through 1983, the nation reduced its energy consumption even as the population and economy expanded. Prodded by higher costs and led on conservation crusades by Presidents Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, Americans learned to do more with less. That effort is still yielding great benefits. Owners of older buildings and homes installed thicker insulation and tighter windows. As technology improved, every new home, factory and car came with far more efficient appliances, machines and engines than in the 1970's. But energy demand has risen so much since the mid-1980's that, next year, the Energy Department predicts, consumption per person will come to within 2 percent of the peak in 1973, before any of these energy-saving advances had begun. Declining energy prices -- now lower in real terms than before the first embargo -- have made the difference. In the dollar-a-gallon era, why spend much time or money saving a gallon or a watt? Evidence of the more energy-intensive life style is everywhere. Since the early 1970's, as the average household has shrunk by a sixth, the average new home has grown by a third. Even moderately priced homes are now stuffed with energy-hungry features, from central air-conditioning to Jacuzzis and security systems. Look at families like T. C. and Michael McCracken and their year-old daughter, Lydia. The McCrackens, avid hikers, are far more willing than most Americans to shop for energy-saving appliances or ride the bus to work. But here in Arvada, outside Denver, standard features of their nearly completed tract home include ceilings so high that overhead fans, finding a new season and purpose, are required in winter to blow rising heat back down. With 2,600 square feet to fill, Mr. McCracken plans to install a home office, a home theater and a home brewery fed by its own gas line. What Mrs. McCracken calls a ''killer kitchen'' has all the standard appliances and the electrical capacity for more than a dozen others, plus room to seat a family of 10. Energy use is rising even faster on the roads. Next year, Americans are expected to burn more fuel per person than in 1973, before the Government set mileage standards. More families have two earners, and the suburbs continue to sprawl, so Americans are driving more than ever. As for fuel economy, the growing popularity of light trucks -- minivans, sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks -- has begun to reverse two decades of gains. The daily hour to hour and a half that Mrs. McCracken, a personnel manager, has spent commuting and running errands in her Dodge Caravan minivan will stretch by another half-hour once she moves. And Mr. McCracken will put more miles on his sport utility vehicle, an Isuzu Rodeo. Corporate habits are going the same way. Businesses saved more energy than individuals did through the mid-1980's but have used the most extra energy ever since. Chemical producers, among the heaviest energy users, say that in the 1990's they have all but quit making improvements solely to save energy. Electric utilities are cutting reimbursements for installing more efficient heating, cooling, lighting and other equipment at work and at home. Cheap, abundant energy has in fact produced great benefits, fueling an era of rising standards of living and dormant inflation. Lower demand from Asia has pushed oil prices down even further lately, with shortages unlikely for years. Growing energy demand is a natural result. But it conflicts with the nation's declared goals of reducing dependence on imported oil and lowering carbon dioxide emissions, thought to cause global warming. It also requires the nation and its oil companies to spend billions of dollars laying pipelines through unstable regions, building drilling platforms in deep seas and defending foreign supplies. Clearly, the nation relies more than ever on overseas oil. Imports account for a record 50 percent of consumption, up from 35 percent in 1973. Though a rising share comes from secure neighbors like Mexico and Venezuela, the United States still gets about 10 percent of its oil from the Persian Gulf, twice the level in 1973. The rising use of fossil fuels has also raised the atmosphere's level of carbon dioxide. The Clinton Administration pledged at a conference in Kyoto, Japan, last December to cut these emissions. That is not a simple task, said Daniel Yergin, chairman of Cambridge Energy Research Associates. ''Environmental concerns point one way and prices point the other way,'' he said. President Clinton is now striving to put energy efficiency back on the nation's agenda. He asked Congress for $6.3 billion over five years, including $3.6 billion in tax incentives and $2.7 billion for research. Accelerating the introduction of electric cars and other technologies would make energy savings nearly painless, he argues. Administration officials note that improving technology has already allowed Americans to live better with far less energy than they would otherwise use. Since the mid-1980's, however, these advances have slowed. Many corporate executives and members of Congress call global warming a distant peril with uncertain causes. They portray the Administration's plans as a costly threat to the nation's prosperity. They also discount the danger of rising imports, saying that free markets will relieve high prices or tight supplies by promoting increased output and efficiency. In a compromise, Congress allowed $202 million of the $473 million for research this year but nothing for tax incentives. It was 25 years ago this month, and again in late 1978, that vengeful Middle Eastern oil exporters squeezed their supplies to the United States and raised prices worldwide. A nation that was virtually self-sufficient into the 1950's had become a petroleum captive. Gasoline prices soared, lines at the pump stretched beyond frustration and the economy fell into repeated recessions. Americans turned down their thermostats and bought fuel-efficient Hondas, Datsuns and Toyotas. At work, they replaced millions of inefficient motors, lighting fixtures and generators. President Nixon called for a national effort on the scale of the making of the atomic bomb.''Let us set as our national goal,'' he said, ''with the determination of the Manhattan Project, that by the end of this decade we will have developed the potential to meet our own energy needs without depending on any foreign energy source.''President Carter, wearing a sweater in a televised speech to drive home his point, termed energy conservation the equivalent of fighting a war. But traumatic memories of oil shocks have long been soothed by plentiful, low-cost supplies. At about $1 a gallon -- compared with $1.10, adjusting for inflation, in 1973 -- fuel is as cheap as ever. United States gasoline prices remain less than half those in Europe and Japan, where energy is heavily taxed. Americans consume more than twice as much energy per person as Europeans or the Japanese. The Energy Information Administration predicts that, in the absence of efforts to curb growing energy use, carbon emissions from burning fuel will rise 33 percent from 1990 to 2010, while the President has pledged to lower them by 7 percent. The agency's experts scoff at the prospects of meeting that goal unless prices rise significantly.''If you look at our actions rather than words, it's evident we don't care,'' said Dwight K. French, a specialist on consumption trends. ''Only the next crisis will again make conservation a priority. End of discussion.''On the Home Front  More Square Feet And 'Vampires'Here in Arvada, in the subdivisions carved into the sagebrush hills of Denver's suburbs, the McCrackens' new home will have far more efficient heating, air-conditioning and major appliances than the homes of 25 years ago. Modern weatherstripping and vinyl-sealed windows will help keep the Colorado cold out and the heat in. In energy consumption per square foot, the home of the late 1990's is the winner. But not the overall champion. Since the early 1970's, the average size of a new home has risen to 2,100 square feet from 1,600, even as the average household has shrunk to 3 people from 3.6. ''It's almost like the trend to sport utility vehicles,'' said Donn D. Eley, chief financial officer of Village Homes, the McCrackens' builder. ''They can't build them big enough.''Home builders are also bringing to tract homes the expansive features once reserved for mansions. ''Wow factors,'' they are called in the trade. In the $150,000-to-$300,000 range, the confined quarters of yesteryear just won't do. Larger homes with fewer people but more things to plug in have pushed home energy consumption back to the levels of the 1970's. Residential energy consumption per person fell by a tenth from 1973 to 1983 but has since risen about as much. Tighter Federal standards for homes and major appliances promise to save enough energy over the coming years to offset what goes to heat and cool larger homes. But then come the computers, videocassette recorders, dishwashers, clothes washers and dryers that have been using about 5 percent more energy a year since 1990. Early in the next decade, the Energy Department predicts, such appliances will consume even more energy than heating. Many of these devices are always on, ready at the push of a button. Razors and electric toothbrushes have chargers, fax machines are poised to send and receive, televisions and videocassette recorders merely go dormant, not off. Together, these items use more power than a refrigerator. ''They're called vampires,'' said Arthur H. Rosenfeld, a senior adviser for efficiency at the Energy Department. ''They suck electricity.''Central air-conditioning, in less than 40 percent of new homes in 1971, is now in more than 80 percent. Dishwashers have gone from luxuries, found in 19 percent of households in 1970, toward necessities, found in 57 percent as of 1996. The standard ceiling height has risen to nine feet from eight, meaning more space to heat and cool. ''Even though the efficiency of larger homes has improved,'' said Gopal Ahluwalia, research director for the National Association of Home Builders, ''the total volume, the use of glass, the fireplaces and the appliances lead to higher energy consumption. They will not buy a home without these energy-inefficient features.''As Coloradans who believe weekends were made for hiking and cross-country skiing, the McCrackens, trim 31-year-olds, say they would like to live greener. To save water and energy, they plan to pay about $300 extra for a high-efficiency washer and dryer. Mr. McCracken has even joined the declining 5 percent of Americans who ride mass transit -- for him a bus -- to his job as a consultant and programmer for I.B.M.But their new house, like many today, is another story. Join the McCrackens in the Wyndham Park subdivision as they open the door to a 2,600-square-foot model home like the one they are buying nearby for $270,000. A towering entryway and its clerestory windows tilt their gazes upward. The two-story, 21-foot spaces continue on into the living room and the family room.''What I love about this is the high ceilings,'' Mrs. McCracken volunteered. ''I know they are terribly inefficient. But it does make it seem so spacious.''Her husband was nodding as Jack Zelkin, a senior marketing executive with the builder, listed the features. Mr. McCracken was already making plans to take advantage of the upgraded phone, cable and data wiring, for internal video and computer networks, that became standard a year ago, even in homes costing less than $150,000. Saving energy has become a dormant issue, said Mr. Zelkin, who was once an energy-efficiency expert for the local utility.''I'm a tree-hugging, granola-eating, environmental zealot,'' he said. ''But if you give these buyers a choice between a Jacuzzi tub or extra insulation, they'll take the Jacuzzi tub every time.''On the Road  Traveling Farther, And Less EfficientlyAmericans are not only living in spacious new homes. They're also living in their cars. From her home in Lakewood, another Denver suburb, Mrs. McCracken has driven her minivan about 20 minutes to Golden to drop off her daughter at day care. Then it is 10 minutes back to her office in Lakewood, at Harveys Wagon Wheel Hotel/Casino. Or, a couple of times a week, she drives 20 minutes to the casino itself in Central City. After work, Mrs. McCracken reverses the pattern, often adding a stop at the King Soopers grocery store, the Blockbuster video store or the cleaner's. From her new house, it will be 15 minutes more each way, meaning that she will spend up to two hours in the car every day. Tens of millions of T. C. McCrackens who have entered the work force have become a prime factor pushing energy use for travel up 12 percent for each American since 1983, back to the previous peak in 1978. In 1975, only 47 percent of American women with children younger than 18 were working or looking for work. By 1997, it was 72 percent. Many households have almost enough cars to create their own traffic jams. Nearly one in five households has three or more cars, up from about one in 25 in 1969. Commuters of both sexes also live farther from work. The average commuting distance grew by more than a third from 1983 to 1995, to 11.6 miles, even as car-pooling and the use of mass transit declined. While covering more miles, Americans are getting fewer miles per gallon now that they are buying nearly equal numbers of cars and light trucks. Back in 1975, light trucks accounted for only a fifth of sales. Cars are meanwhile becoming more powerful. Auto makers that once concentrated on building leaner, more efficient models have instead been adding the muscle that customers crave. Average horsepower has risen to 156 in 1996 from 99 in 1982 -- and the time needed to zoom from zero to 60 has fallen to 10.7 seconds from 14.4. And as speed limits have increased, those cars are using still more energy. As vice president for operations at A.A.A. Colorado, Vickie W. Stark's job is to encourage travel. But even she decided she was spending too much time behind the wheel. Her husband, a computer network manager, had followed her in assignments from Washington to Florida to Cheyenne, Wyo., where they bought a home north of town. When Ms. Stark got a job in Denver in 1995, he refused to budge. And so Ms. Stark began driving more than two hours each way, or 127 miles, not counting her monthly one-day round trips to each of six offices elsewhere around the state. A few months after she began the long haul from Cheyenne, Ms. Stark made a habit of calling her husband and two children on her car phone just as she was passing the exit for Windsor, Colo., the halfway point. ''If we lived here, I'd be home,'' she always said. In September 1996, they moved again -- to Windsor. As a family, they did not save any driving, but they did redistribute it. Her husband now has a 52-mile trip north, and Ms. Stark a 63-mile trip south. All Ms. Stark has sacrificed by moving are bragging rights to the longest trip to work. Her neighbors next door and just across the street also work in Denver. In the Factory  Energy Conservation A Lower PriorityThree times a week, 100-car trains more than a mile long arrive brimming with coal at the Celanese Ltd. chemical plant near Pampa in the Texas Panhandle. The trains dump their contents into chutes that form a pile 10 stories high. Coal dust dances in the flatland winds. The coal is burned to boil water, providing the heat for producing chemicals like acetic acid, which is used in clothing fibers and plastic parts. The plant also uses enough electricity to power a city of more than 50,000. In one of the most energy-hungry industries, Pampa makes chemicals that are twice as energy intensive per pound as the Celanese average. The plant, which opened in 1952, initially treated energy as if it were as cheap and plentiful as the air. Steam and heat were simply vented. The oil embargoes of the 1970's brought a new outlook. Steam used in one process was rerouted to other processes. As a result, Pampa and other Celanese plants raised their energy efficiency 2 percent to 3 percent a year through the 1980's. But in the 1990's, with lower energy prices reducing the payoffs, they have improved at less than half those rates, if at all. ''The emphasis is simply elsewhere these days,'' said Thomas Parker Jr., managing director for tax policy and energy at the Chemical Manufacturers Association. Across all businesses, industrial and commercial energy use fell 18 percent from 1973 to 1983, then jumped 37 percent by 1997. The growing corporate appetite for energy comes despite the economy's shift from smokestack industries like steelmaking to software and entertainment. Managers in many industries say they achieved the easiest savings long ago. ''We picked the low-hanging fruit first, in the 70's and 80's,'' emphasized Edward E. Quick, the environmental manager for Celanese. ''As we move into the 1990's, we're finding the available technology much more costly.''Amory B. Lovins, whose Rocky Mountain Institute promotes energy efficiency, will hear none of it. He rattles off a half-dozen technologies like computerized controls that he says the chemical plants have failed to adequately exploit. ''When the Celanese guys say you're running out of low-hanging fruit, the only thing I can say, based on the experience of people in this industry, is that the fruit is bushing up around our ankles.''Riley R. Kothmann, who runs the Pampa plant, has some ready answers. His tour includes a room where walls of dials and meters have been succeeded by banks of computer screens and controls. But at times, it seems, fruit from higher branches drops on plant supervisors' heads. Even without reaching for energy savings, they find, the savings often land on them. Compelled by law to contain emissions, Pampa's technicians found that those emissions could go back through a turbine to raise the plant's electricity production by nearly 10 percent. Or there was the time three or four years ago when managers began wrapping insulation around the joints where pipes are bolted together. ''Pampa just had a tradition of not doing it,'' Mr. Kothmann said. ''It's so much easier to continue doing things the way you used to.''To meet the goals of the Kyoto treaty for reducing emissions, Celanese executives say they would have to improve their energy efficiency by 3 percent a year through 2010, or as rapidly as in the 70's and 80's. All the technology they know of cannot meet that goal unless they cut production, said R. David Damron, the company's director for Government affairs. If Washington insists, he said, ''you're going to stifle growth.''Celanese is still hedging. In early June, a company energy committee was assigned to find ways of meeting the goals, whatever the costs. The next step will probably be to find ways of doing the suggested projects at manageable costs. Mr. Kothmann, a member of the committee, recalls that environmental controls expected to cost $800 million a few years ago were delivered for less than $300 million. ''Our experience has shown that we can achieve much more for much less than we anticipated it costing us,'' he said. Energy use is rising in corporate offices as well as plants. Like homes, they have far more efficient heating, lighting and cooling, but also far more electronics. Electric utilities have cut their support for installing more efficient equipment to $1.9 billion in 1996 from $2.7 billion in 1994. They say they cannot afford these programs in the competitive new era of deregulation. Consolidated Edison, which serves New York City and most of Westchester County, cut its efficiency program to $31 million last year from $125 million in 1993 and has now eliminated it. Customers had been rewarded for deeds like installing more efficient appliances and compact fluorescent light bulbs instead of standard incandescents. In its place, Con Ed, with state backing, plans to spend $25 million to $30 million a year on programs including low-cost loans for companies to develop more efficient electrical products and incentives to help them sell these products more cheaply.''For less of an incentive per light bulb, appliance or motor, you can get a lot more in energy savings,'' contended Stephen Pertusiello, the company's program manager for market transformation. But Peter A. Bradford, the chairman of the New York State Public Service Commission from 1987 to 1995, said Con Ed's case was at best uncertain. ''You are replacing a known and proven set of programs with speculation,'' he said. In the Political Arena  Calls for Action Face ChallengesPresidents going back to Richard Nixon have tried to arrest the nation's growing energy use. In the face of the 1973 oil embargo, he urged the nation to turn down its thermostats, form car pools and more. He announced that December that the lights on the national Christmas tree would be kept off. The next month, he signed the Emergency Highway Conservation Act, setting a speed limit of 55 miles an hour. The first fuel-efficiency standards for cars took effect in 1975, requiring the average to double, to 27.5 miles a gallon, over a decade. By 1977, Jimmy Carter was promoting the search for renewable sources of energy like sunlight, wind, wood and wastes. He called his conservation campaign ''the moral equivalent of war.''Then, in 1978 and 1979, another round of production cuts by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, compounding shortages caused by American price controls and regional allocations, brought the gas lines back. More than half the nation's gas stations were closed during the first summer weekend in 1979. As gasoline climbed by 1981 to $2.05 a gallon in today's dollars, the nation began its most successful peacetime conservation effort. Americans used 43 percent less energy for every dollar of gross domestic product in 1986 than at the peak in 1972. From 1987 through last year, energy use per dollar of output declined by only an additional 8 percent. By the mid-1980's, OPEC was in disarray and energy prices had declined. President Ronald Reagan cut back conservation and renewable-energy programs. The rural speed limit was raised to 65 miles an hour. This decade brought a reminder that foreign oilfields have their risks. Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 provoked a stock market selloff and a run-up in energy costs that contributed to the decade's only recession, the third in a row that came after oil supplies were pinched. President Clinton, taking office in 1993, asked Congress to raise taxes on all fuels, including coal, by the equivalent of a dime a gallon. He got 4.3 cents on motor fuels only. In 1995, Congress repealed the national speed limits, and most states set their own at 65, 70 or even 75. Over the last year, President Clinton has sought to make energy efficiency a renewed national priority. But to keep down the costs of reducing emissions, the United States plans to achieve only about a quarter of the required reductions itself. The trading of emissions rights would allow America to pay other nations to achieve the rest. At home, the White House wants to promote advances in electric cars, renewable energy and the like. ''My gut is, we will see the introduction of these new technologies very quickly,'' said Ernest Moniz, the Under Secretary of Energy, whose responsibilities include the efficiency programs. With much of the technology already available, he said, ''We're not waiting for some magic bullet.''Republicans in Congress have portrayed the Kyoto accord as a dangerous effort to shape energy policy by raising false environmental fears. It leaves out developing nations, they say, and by requiring drastic energy savings, it threatens the United States with job losses resulting from much higher costs than the Administration acknowledges. Chuck Hagel, the Nebraska Republican who led the Senate's delegation to Kyoto, says that for all the risks of growing dependence on imported oil, ''The answer is not just to say we're going to lower everybody's standard of living.''In the face of such opposition, President Clinton has not yet sought Senate ratification, saying that he, too, wants to include developing nations. But Europe and Japan are clamoring for the United States to take action, and the Administration has promised to submit the treaty next year. Conservation is now so unpopular that its advocates shun the label. ''Use the term efficiency,'' said Mr. Lovins at his Rocky Mountain Institute headquarters in Old Snowmass, Colo. ''Conservation to a third of Americans means doing less, worse or without. It means privation, discomfort and curtailment.''If the cause of energy conservation has a last, remote redoubt, it is his stone-and-glass compound 7,100 feet high on the western flanks of the Continental Divide. There, he shows off an indoor tropical forest, luxriant with pink and yellow bougainvillea and a banana tree that has yielded 26 crops. Despite temperatures as low as 47 degrees below zero, he has no heating bills and no furnace. Instead, he has triple weatherstripping and heat-trapping windows and walls. Technological efficiencies, or what Mr. Lovins calls negawatts, can capture energy far more cheaply, in his view, than spending billions to build more power plants or produce more oil from remote or politically volatile regions. With energy prices so low, however, some in Washington say that high demand is only a sign that free markets are working in everyone's best interests. ''Those who have an energy fetish argue that saving energy is more important than saving money or time,'' said Fred L. Smith, president of the Competitive Enterprise Institute there. Low energy prices allow more people to afford air-conditioning and cars, he says. ''If we raise the price of energy, we will push some people back onto the buses.''But just as open-heart surgery is far more traumatic than regular exercise and a low-fat diet, other experts say that an abrupt response to another oil shock or environmental crisis could make the earlier discipline of gradual energy savings seem mild. For Joseph J. Romm, who until recently ran the Energy Department's efficiency programs, it is only a question of when the nation will return to conservation, not if. Contending that the world's oil supplies will eventually tighten and temperatures rise, he said, ''Ten years or 15 years from now, people will be desperate to take action.''

IT was during the oil embargo era of the 1970's that Patricia Nelson Limerick, who is now a leading historian of the American West, announced to her students at Yale that Americans' outlook and behavior had gone through a momentous change. No more vistas of limitless resources. No more endlessly rising consumption. The Era of Scarcity had begun. To save fuel and emphasize her belief, Ms. Limerick got around by bicycle, train and bus. But 25 years later, Americans are consuming about as much energy as ever. By next year, the Energy Department predicts consumption per person will come to within 2 percent of the 1973 peak. Americans are living in bigger homes crammed with more appliances and driving larger, more powerful cars and more light trucks. Ms. Limerick is still riding buses. But she admits she got the broader pattern wrong. ''I was quite a sucker,'' she says. The Land GrabFar from illustrating a transformation in American character, the nation's heavy and rising use of its most basic fuels illustrates consistencies. The distinctions between America and most other advanced nations endure. As the 19th-century American historian Frederick Jackson Turner famously said, the frontier set America apart from its European forebears. For Americans, there was always more land, food and fortune out there for the grabbing. Though the Census Bureau declared the frontier closed more than a century ago, in many ways it remains open. Americans have gone back to using energy as if it were limitless -- consuming far more per person than Asians or Europeans. Only Canadians, with more heavy industry and more chilblains, consume more. Low energy prices are regarded as a part of the Bill of Rights. Politicians who try to tax or otherwise raise the cost of fuel anywhere near the levels in Europe are summarily rebuked. The wide open frontier still lives in the naming and advertising of pickups and sports utility vehicles. Americans venture forth in their Blazers, Explorers and Durangos. In commercials these trucks rumble over endless stretches of Western highway. Revisionist historians like Ms. Limerick point out that Western settlement also included official repression of Indians and other minorities, the ravaging of the environment and a culture of violence. Revisionist Western states and cities that once welcomed mining and development are now trying to clean up pollution from those mines and control urban sprawl. America's pattern of settlement, more dispersed than in most other advanced nations, locks in the need for cheap, abundant energy.  But underneath the roar of factory machinery, home construction and expressway traffic is the clang of a moral clash. Half the nation's oil is imported. Scientists caution that emissions from rising energy use aggravate global warming. But ever since proto-environmentalists warned of timber depletion in the 1870's, Americans have learned to doubt the need for conservation. Within the country, energy use varies greatly. New Yorkers and Hawaiians are practically foreigners, merely sipping fuel while Alaskans and Texans guzzle it. The average Alaskan uses more than five times as much energy as the New Yorker, who uses the least; the Texan burns more than two and a half times as much. The presence of heavy industry accounts for the greatest differences. Louisiana and Texas, besides having plenty of oil wells, are home to the chemical and refining businesses. Alaska and Wyoming produce great quantities of oil, coal and natural gas, especially in proportion to their populations. In New York, smokestacks and drilling rigs are few but subway and taxi riders many. New Yorkers are also more apt than other Americans to live jammed into apartments whose energy demands are far lower than for houses. And with common walls, says Arthur Rypinski, a Department of Energy economist, ''You get to share your neighbor's heating and cooling.'' As for Hawaii, it counts more on tourism and pineapples than on petrochemical plants, and has far lower heating bills than Wyoming or Alaska. During the 1970's embargo era, Texans, who considered their state an honorary member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, were never shy about letting Northerners know who had the most fuel. Bumper stickers on their Lincoln Continentals and long-bed pickups said, ''Let the Yankees Freeze in the Dark.'' With oil prices so low, perhaps Texans should mount a gracious campaign assuring New Yorkers they are welcome to every drop Texas has. A Lowly Light BulbIn Washington, the conflict between the energy-hungry life style and energy-saving impulses extends to the White House. At his conference on global warming last October, President Clinton confessed his doubts about how much the nation could alter its ways. Or even how much he could change his own.''I'm plagued by the example of the light bulb I have in my living room of the White House that I read under at night,'' Mr. Clinton said, ''and I ask myself, 'Why isn't every light bulb in the White House like this?' '' The lighting in question was a readily available, compact fluorescent bulb whose longer life and energy efficiency pay for its initial high cost several times over. ''Why are we not all doing this?'' he asked. Faced with a battle many Americans agree is worth fighting but don't want to fight themselves, the Clinton Administration has proposed hiring hungry foreign mercenaries. Through trading in emissions rights, the White House plans to pay developing countries to achieve about three-fourths of America's reductions required under last year's Kyoto accord. Europe and Japan have howled that this plan violates that accord, at least in spirit. They must be cranky from having to drive such tiny cars.

International negotiators will resume talks on Monday in Buenos Aires over details in the treaty to fight global warming, but with their expectations sharply lowered. Last year in Kyoto, Japan, more than 150 nations hammered out a far-reaching agreement for steep reductions in emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases by industrialized countries in the next 10 to 15 years. They also agreed, in principle, to establish a system to allow the sale or trade of emissions permits between countries and to do more to bring developing countries into the effort, two key demands made by the United States. In theory, trading emissions credits would lessen the overall cost of reducing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere by letting one country pay another to reduce emissions to meet global targets. But there has been little progress since the Kyoto Protocol was approved. And it now appears highly unlikely that an agreement on the details will be reached in time for the United States Senate to vote on ratification before the Presidential elections in 2000. The Kyoto Protocol continues to face substantial opposition among major American energy producers and consumers, who say it would be too costly. Treaty supporters in this country, acknowledging the slow pace of negotiations, have begun to emphasize steps that can be taken before mandatory emissions restrictions go into effect. They want Congress to guarantee that companies voluntarily reducing emissions of waste industrial gases believed to be a factor in global warming will receive credit for the actions when a treaty finally takes shape. Signaling the lowered expectations, Stuart E. Eizenstat, the senior American negotiator, cautioned that the Administration's first objective is to avoid what he called ''backsliding'' by other nations on the agreement that the United States brokered last year. In Kyoto, the Clinton Administration agreed to cut United States emissions over the next 10 to 15 years to a level 7 percent below 1990's emissions -- if international trading of emissions credits is allowed. That would let the United States meet a big part of its obligation by paying other countries to reduce their emissions more than the treaty requires. European nations are calling for limits on how much a country could rely on emissions trading to meet its treaty obligations. But Mr. Eizenstat said: ''I want to drive home as strongly as I can that we adamantly oppose efforts by the European Union or others to set arbitrary limits on trading. That is not consistent with either the letter or the spirit of Kyoto, and it would impose unsustainable costs on the U.S. economy.''After Kyoto, the parties to the treaty were also expected to work out what roles the developing nations would accept and what aid the industrial powers would provide them. Big developing nations are expected to overtake the United States in emissions of greenhouse gases sometime in the next century. But many developing countries still are resisting commitments to reduce their emissions until they see action by the developed countries like the United States, which produces a quarter of the world's greenhouse gases. Some developing nations -- even China, which at Kyoto was skeptical of measures to increase the role of developing nations -- are said to be intrigued by the ''clean development mechanism'' included in the protocol. It would funnel money and technology to energy efficiency projects in developing countries, letting industrialized nations take some of the credit for the resulting reductions in emissions. But the details of this, too, remain to be resolved. Another source of delay is scientific uncertainty over how to count deforestation and reforestation in each country's contribution to the atmosphere's carbon dioxide. Growing trees absorb carbon dioxide, storing the carbon in wood and releasing oxygen. But the treaty partners will not decide how to score forestry until a science panel reports in about two years. In the next two weeks, negotiators are expected to do little more than to agree on a pace for further talks and studies.''I think a success at Buenos Aires would be a work plan and timetable,'' Melinda Kimble, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for International Environmental Issues, said at a recent briefing for foreign reporters. Christopher Flavin, an energy expert at the Worldwatch Institute, an environmental research organization, said: ''The Kyoto Protocol has been moving forward more slowly than most people had hoped for. The number of new, complicated issues added in the six months before the Kyoto Protocol was negotiated created a level of negotiating complexity that I fear has got us to the point that this protocol is in real danger.''But advocates are pressing industrial companies to reduce their emissions anyway. In Congress, a bipartisan group has introduced legislation that would guarantee that those who act soon will be given financial credits under any final agreement, whether it applies only in the United States or around the world. Last week, members of the President's Council on Sustainable Development, made up of industry, government and citizen groups, also endorsed steps to give credit for voluntary early actions to reduce emissions. Several big companies, including British Petroleum, United Technologies and Du Pont, have already pledged to cut their emissions and have begun to urge Congress to approve credits for early actions. Even industry groups like the Global Climate Coalition, which opposes the Kyoto Protocol, are supporting the Administration's insistence on unfettered trading. ''If emission caps are ever imposed, these market tools will be absolutely necessary to lessen high economic burdens placed on our citizens,'' said Connie Holmes, the organization's chairwoman.

INTERNATIONAL A3-14Hurricane Toll Exceeds 1,000 in Central America  Intense and widespread flooding in the wake of Hurricane Mitch has killed more than a thousand people in Central America, with hundreds more still missing, their villages buried under huge mudslides, relief and government officials said. A1Memorial for Yitzak Rabin  Israel held its first nationwide memorial for Yitzak Rabin, the former Prime Minister, three years after his assassination, signaling a concerted effort to transform him from a partisan hero into a figure of consensus -- a national symbol of peace. A12Hamas Warns Arafat's Officers  The armed wing of the militant Islamic group Hamas warned for the first time that it may turn its guns on Yasir Arafat's police force. The Palestinian chief of police vowed that his men would respond, and he issued orders from his Gaza office to shoot at suspected assailants. The Hamas threat was a departure in its longstanding position that it would never be drawn into a civil war and signaled a deepening crisis for the Palestinian Authority. A12New U.S.-Israeli Pact  President Clinton and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu signed an agreement that officials in both countries described as a significant intensification of the American commitment to safeguard Israel's security in a post-Soviet world. A13U.S. Demands Iraqi Compliance  The Clinton Administration said it would consider military strikes against Iraq if President Saddam Hussein did not back down from his decision to halt all cooperation with United Nations weapons inspectors. President Clinton said Iraq's move clearly violated United Nations Security Council resolutions. A12Treaty Faces Tough Battle  International negotiators will resume talks today in Buenos Aires over details in the treaty to fight global warming, but with their expectations sharply lowered. Little progress has been made since the Kyoto Protocol was approved last year, and it appears unlikely that an agreement on the details will be reached in time for the United States Senate to vote on ratification before the elections in 2000. A6Distress in South Korea  Growing numbers of ''economic orphans,'' though still very rare, are just one symptom of the psychological distress tearing at families as South Korea's economy descends in a tailspin. A14Adams Seeks I.R.A. Restraint  Gerry Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, said he would appeal to the overwhelmingly Roman Catholic guerrilla organization not to retaliate for the killing, apparently by Protestants, of a Catholic man in Belfast on Saturday. A8NATIONAL A16-23Clinton Leads a Drive To Galvanize Black Voters  President Clinton invoked Speaker Newt Gingrich, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Rosa Parks in an impassioned plea that was part of a drive by Democrats to spur turnout by black voters in the election on Tuesday. Mr. Clinton appeared at a predominantly black church in Baltimore in his final barnstorming trip of the campaign year. A1In scores of tight House and Senate races across the country, campaign workers are applying the personal touch and powers of persuasion to rally supporters. In a non-Presidential election year like this, with the economy humming and no national issues stirring passions, only committed voters -- less than 4 in 10 of those eligible -- are expected to vote on Tuesday. A20Voters across the nation this week face measures that would allow direct citizen lawmaking through a process generally known as ''initiative and referendum,'' with the battles around some of them so intense that they have generated at least as much attention as Congressional races. A22Democratic Governors in the 14-state interior West risk falling in status from endangered to nearly extinct. In the three states with Democratic Governors -- Colorado, Nebraska and Nevada -- Republican candidates approach the elections with leads in opinion polls. A22Glenn Talks of Faith  Senator John Glenn said his return to space aboard the shuttle Discovery has strengthened his religious faith and illustrates the benefits of cooperating with other nations in space instead of competing with them, as was the case during his first flight three decades ago. A16Citigroup President to Resign  Jamie Dimon, president of Citigroup, the world's largest financial services concern, said that he would leave the company, a surprising move that raises questions about a successor. A18NEW YORK/REGION B1-10Old-Style Politicking Colors a Senate Race  Representative Charles E. Schumer campaigned for the Senate in black, Jewish and Hispanic neighborhoods across New York City, bringing in Vice President Al Gore in an effort to rally support in the election. His opponent, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, went to Orthodox Jewish communities in Brooklyn, portraying himself as an underdog in the final weekend of the bruising race. A1The Democratic and Republican Parties are using a new technique -- calls to potential voters that feature recorded messages from the candidates and political celebrities -- along with the customary mailings, fliers and telephone banks to get their voters to the polls. A1Peter F. Vallone, the Democratic candidate for Governor, debated what he called ''an empty chair,'' participating in a televised forum without his Republican opponent, Governor Pataki, who skipped the event and stumped upstate. B5B. Thomas Golisano's decision to spend $20 million of his fortune on a third-party campaign for governor may turn out to have been another smart investment. The stock price of Mr. Golisano's payroll processing company, Paychex, has jumped, just as it did when he ran for governor in 1994. B5ARTS E1-8OBITUARIES B11Bulldog Turner  A Chicago Bears Hall of Fame center and linebacker who played on four National Football League championship teams in the 1940's, he was 79. B11Peter Griffin  An algebra teacher with such a winning way with numbers that he unlocked the mathematics of blackjack with a wink and became a cult figure to a generation of casino card counters, along the way writing the authoritative ''Theory of Blackjack,'' he was 61. B11BUSINESS DAY C1-10Part-Timers as Full-Timers  A new class of part-timers, mostly women, is emerging and working what used to be considered full-time hours -- 35 or 40 hours a week. The employees want to cut back their official hours so they can spend more time with their children or deal with other responsibilities. A1$1 Billion Software Deal  BMC Software, a software company based in Houston, is expected to announce today that it is acquiring Boole & Babbage, one of Silicon Valley's older companies, for nearly $1 billion in stock. C2Business Digest C1SPORTSMONDAY D1-10Jets Win, 20-17  John Hall kicked a winning field goal with 2 seconds remaining. D1THE MARATHON F1-10Marathon Winners  John Kagwe of Kenya repeated as champion of the New York City Marathon. Franca Fiacconi became the first Italian woman to win the New York race. F1EDITORIAL A26-27Editorials: New chill in China; vote no on New York City ''reform''; vote yes for open space in New Jersey; Brent Staples on Jefferson.  Columns: William Safire. Bridge E6Metro. Diary B2Crossword E8Weather B8Correction:  November 3, 1998, Tuesday  The News Summary yesterday included an entry erroneously in some copies for an obituary of Rudolph J. Melone, founder of the Gilroy, Calif., Garlic Festival. It appears today, on page B11. Correction: November 3, 1998, TuesdayThe News Summary yesterday included an entry erroneously in some copies for an obituary of Rudolph J. Melone, founder of the Gilroy, Calif., Garlic Festival. It appears today, on page B11.

Diplomats from more than 150 nations gathered in Buenos Aires this week to assess what they had done since the Kyoto agreement on global warming last December. The answer is, not much. They can be happy about one thing. Nobody has successfully challenged the urgency of their mission. Despite well-financed efforts by some industry groups to minimize the warming threat, the scientific consensus -- that the unchecked burning of fossil fuels could someday cause great damage to the environment -- remains intact. What is not intact is the spirit of common purpose that produced the Kyoto agreement. The Kyoto Protocol committed the industrialized world to an average 5 percent reduction in greenhouse emissions below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012 -- a remarkably ambitious target, given the world's rising dependence on fossil fuels. The American target is 7 percent. But many important details were left unsettled. Even worse, the giant developing countries like India and China have yet to be brought on board. Until that happens, Senate ratification is out of the question. Meanwhile, greenhouse gases in the atmosphere continue to rise. Buenos Aires is a good place to re-energize the process. Two issues are of central importance. Early Action. Although Kyoto's targets would not become legally binding until 2008, a quick start on the problem is essential -- especially in the United States, which emits one-fourth of the world's  greenhouse gases. Because America's emissions are projected to rise by 30 percent between now and 2008 under ''business as usual'' scenarios, it would be foolish to dawdle. Last-minute efforts to reverse the energy trajectory would be ruinously expensive. A surprising number of American companies like the idea of early action. For the last year, two public-interest groups -- the Pew Center on Global Climate Change and the Environmental Defense Fund -- have been signing up companies like Boeing, United Technologies and British Petroleum that are prepared to reduce their own emissions even before a treaty is ratified. But the list would surely be longer if some way could be found to reward companies for taking action now, perhaps by giving them credits they could use to meet whatever obligations they incur when the agreement finally kicks in. In the Senate, Joseph Lieberman, a Democrat, and John Chafee and Connie Mack, both Republicans, have introduced legislation establishing a mechanism to do just that. But they will have to persuade their colleagues in Congress, which grudgingly provided more money for clean-energy research in the new budget year but has otherwise been indifferent to the global warming issue. Emissions Trading. The United States would have rejected the Kyoto Protocol if it had not included a provision that allows the sale or trade of emissions allowances among nations. In theory, industrialized nations that cannot quickly meet their targets without crippling energy taxes or costly investments would be able to ''buy'' pollution permits from poorer countries whose economies are so inefficient that even small adjustments can achieve big reductions in emissions. That transfer of capital, in turn, could help developing countries invest in cleaner technologies. The British, among others, fear that the United States will exploit the trading plan to avoid making any real cuts in emissions, buying reductions from others instead. These fears are exaggerated. But the best way to put them to rest is to invite American companies to start cutting their emissions now. That would not only pacify the British but send a positive signal to the less-developed countries, which are unlikely to cut their energy use and prejudice their chances for further growth unless they are sure that America is serious. The United States obviously cannot go it alone. Global warming demands a global response. But the rest of the world is not going to move without the leadership and example of the world's biggest producer of greenhouse gases.

As negotiators from around the world worked on details of an international agreement to fight global warming, the Clinton Administration faced an intense debate among lawmakers today over whether to sign the pact during talks this week in Argentina. There is no doubt that the Administration will sign the agreement eventually, even though it faces an uphill struggle for approval by the Senate. But Congressional adversaries argued today whether signing it now, a step the White House favors as a sign of its commitment to the controversial accord, would strengthen or weaken the bargaining hand of the United States. Some Administration officials said today that no decision had been reached on signing the agreement, but others said that the Administration's envoy to the talks, Stuart E. Eizenstat, would announce in Buenos Aires that it would be signed. The agreement would commit the United States to reducing its emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases, which scientists say threaten to warm the planet and disrupt its climate, by 7 percent below the 1990 levels over the next 10 to 15 years. Opponents have said that this would require cuts in the use of fossil fuel that would devastate the economy. The Administration insists that new technologies would insure a painless transition to a cleaner economy. For weeks, Administration officials have declined to say when the United States would sign the protocol, which was agreed to by more than 150 nations last year in Kyoto, Japan. The current round of talks is aimed at establishing a system of international emissions trading and at defining what role developing countries should play in cutting emissions of the pollution that scientists say may cause major changes in the planet's climate. As reports spread that the Administration would sign the agreement this week, Congressional opponents warned that this would be a political mistake, while those who favor the treaty said signing it now would increase the Administration's influence in the negotiations. Sen. Robert Byrd, a Democrat from West Virginia, where cuts on emissions of carbon dioxide from burning coal would damage the state's mining industry, warned President Clinton to ''resist making empty gestures that will only make the potential future approval of the protocol by the Senate more difficult.''Mr. Byrd is a leader of Congressional opponents of the treaty who contend that it must not be approved until developing nations, whose emissions of greenhouse gases are projected to surpass those of the United States in the next few decades, agree to join industrial nations in cutting emissions. But Sen. Joseph Lieberman, a Democrat from Connecticut, urged the White House to sign the agreement.''If we are not at the table, we cannot cajole or convince the developing nations to become part of the solution,'' he said. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., a treaty opponent in the House and a leader of the Congressional observers' delegation to the talks in Buenos Aires, called on the Administration not to sign the treaty.''Any global warming treaty devoid of developing country participation and credible evidence that America will maintain its economic health and vitality will be dead on arrival,'' said Mr. Sensenbrenner, a Republican from Wisconsin. But Mr. Lieberman, as he left Washington to join the observers from Capitol Hill, called Mr. Sensenbrenner's plea ''a mistake, and a serious abdication of American responsibility to lead in this effort, and also an obstacle to our being able to shape the global response to the problem.''Fred Krupp, the head of the Environmental Defense Fund, an advocacy organization that favors the treaty, said that ''the people who oppose signing are the same people who have opposed the treaty from the beginning, and in fact they are really opposing protecting the planet. We feel very strongly that the time to sign has come.''But other environmentalists were not so enthusiastic.''In my mind, this Administration has made expectations so low, that when they finally sign this weak agreement that they negotiated, people will mistake it for leadership,'' said John Passacantando, executive director of Ozone Action, an environmental group that follows climate issues.

In an important breakthrough, Argentina signaled yesterday that it would become the first developing country to adopt binding targets for controlling emissions of industrial waste gases that are believed to cause global warming. Until now, developing countries have presented a united front in resisting specific limits on their emissions of such gases, which are produced by the burning of coal, oil, wood and natural gas. Rich countries agreed last December in Kyoto, Japan, to reduce emissions by an average of about 5 percent below 1990 levels in the period 2008 to 2012, but poorer nations have refused to follow suit until industrial countries actually show results. Yesterday, at a follow-up conference in Buenos Aires, President Carlos Saul Menem said Argentina would establish goals for carbon-dioxide emissions and in about a year would announce its commitment to those goals for 2008-10. But Maria Julia Alsogaray, an Argentinian who is presiding over the Buenos Aires meeting, later described the goals as limitations on the growth of emissions, not as reductions. While Mr. Menem's speech was somewhat general, Stuart Eizenstat, the head of the United States delegation, said he had been told by Mr. Menem that Argentina would spend the next year analyzing its emissions to produce a binding target. ''This is a major, major move,'' Mr. Eizenstat said, ''truly historic.''There were indications that other developing countries might follow now that Argentina has led the way, some participants in the Buenos Aires talks said. ''No one wants to be the first one out of the box,'' said Connie Holmes, the chairwoman of the Global Climate Coalition, which represents fossil-fuel producers and users. She called Argentina's action ''great,'' if it can follow through. But she pointed out that it may be difficult for Argentina to be brought into the international process under the Kyoto Protocol because no developing countries are covered by it. Argentina wants to pursue its emissions program by taking advantage of some of the protocol's cost-cutting mechanisms like trading of emissions rights, Mr. Eizenstat said he was told. This, President Menem said, implies the creation of a ''new way'' under the 1992 treaty to involve his country and others like it. How that will happen remains to be worked out over months or even years. Moreover, said Ms. Holmes, Argentina's shift will not in itself satisfy the United States Senate, which has made participation by key developing countries a condition for ratifying the Kyoto Protocol. Environmentalists hailed the development. ''It is a major breakthrough,'' said Michael Oppenheimer of the Environmental Defense Fund. ''I don't think there's any doubt about it.'' He called the Argentine move ''a significant first step'' in satisfying the Senate's requirements. The move also represented ''a clear break'' from the developing countries' past insistence that binding limitations would put a cap on their economic growth, said Alden Meyer, a spokesman for the Climate Action Network, an environmental coalition. President Menem said Argentina's economy had grown 6 percent a year in the last decade while greenhouse gases per capita had grown by only 1 percent, and he said his country's purpose was to erase ''the false option between economic growth and environmental protection.''

In an important breakthrough, Argentina signaled that it would become the first developing country to adopt binding targets for controlling emissions of industrial waste gases that are believed to cause global warming. Until now, developing countries had presented a united front in resisting specific limits on their emissions of such gases, which are produced by the burning of coal, oil, wood and natural gas. Developed countries had agreed last December in Kyoto, Japan, to reduce emissions by an average of about 5 percent below 1990 levels in the period 2008 to 2012. However, poorer nations have refused to follow suit until industrial countries actually show results. Article, page A7.

The Administration today signed the international agreement to fight global warming, affirming a crucial American role in a long environmental crusade but not raising any hope of Senate approval in the near future. The signing, which the Administration has long promised, reinforces its commitment to the treaty, which calls for sharp cuts in emissions of industrial gases from burning coal, oil, wood and natural gas. But the accord is not legally binding unless the Senate approves it. Vice President Al Gore said, ''Our signing of the protocol underscores our determination to achieve a truly global solution to this global challenge.'' But he emphasized that much more bargaining lies ahead. Treaty opponents in the United States immediately raised an outcry, but the step was widely applauded in Buenos Aires, where 150 nations are debating how the treaty can be put into effect. Stuart E. Eizenstat, the chief American delegate to the talks there, announced this morning that the United States would sign the pact, which was negotiated last year in Kyoto, Japan. A. Peter Burleigh, the acting American representative to the United Nations, signed it in New York this afternoon. But the Administration, as expected, will not yet submit the Kyoto Protocol for approval by the Senate, where it faces substantial opposition from critics who say the costs to industry would damage the economy. The White House has said all along that the United States would sign it before the deadline next March, but would not ratify it unless key American provisos are accepted. Given the pace of the continuing talks, that probably means not before the elections in 2000. The protocol strengthens a global treaty negotiated in Rio de Janiero in 1992 and ratified during the Bush Administration. Many scientists say rising concentrations of greenhouse gases, warming the earth's surface like an invisible quilt, are threatening grave environmental harm. Without the participation of the United States, the leading source of waste industrial gases, the agreement would collapse. The United States was the 60th nation to sign.''Kyoto is a landmark achievement but it is a work in progress and key issues remain outstanding,'' said Mr. Eizenstat, who is the Undersecretary of State for Economic Affairs. In a telephone interview, he said the signing was intended to strengthen Washington's negotiating hand. But critics in Congress, echoing the views of their constituents in industries like coal and automobiles, said it would reduce American leverage. Mr. Eizenstat called the announcement a high point in negotiations that otherwise have focused on small advances toward putting the complex agreement into force.''I am not gilding the lily when I say there was near euphoria among delegates here,'' he said. ''They just felt this was a real sign of U.S. leadership. I think there was really a doubt that we were really going to pursue this, with all the opposition in the Senate and in other quarters. The feeling was that perhaps the domestic opposition was so stiff that we were going to back off.''To fulfill the accord, the United States would have to cut its emissions by about 7 percent from the 1990 level over the next 10 to 15 years. Emissions have been steadily increasing since 1990, making that target very ambitious. The conditions that the United States is demanding are meant to hold down the costs of compliance and to increase the chance that the Senate will eventually approve. One condition is a system of trading ''emissions credits,'' effectively allowing the United States to reduce its own emissions less by paying other countries to reduce theirs more. Another is persuading developing nations to take a larger role in cutting emissions, encouraging them with financial assistance from developed nations, which would get emissions credits in exchange. Both ideas face strong resistance from some countries that say the first steps must be taken by industrial nations like the United States, which emits about a quarter of all greenhouse gases. Opponents of the treaty are marshalling opposition in Congress, arguing that the targets cannot be met without damaging the economy. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat and a leading treaty proponent, said in Buenos Aires that signing the protocol ''gives us the credibility to be at the table'' in the continuing talks. ''That means we can not only make sure it happens, but that it happens in the way that we prefer,'' he said. But a Democrat who opposes the protocol, Representative John D. Dingell of Michigan, said, ''The timing of this signing only encourages countries who refuse to be part of any effort to limit emissions.''On Wednesday Argentina pledged to curb its emissions, and today Kazakhstan also did so, but populous countries like China and India, whose emissions are growing fast, resist formal limits.''The President has chosen a risky path both domestically and internationally,'' said Connie Holms, the chairwoman of the Global Climate Coalition, which represents major industry groups opposed to the treaty. ''Clinton has sent the U.S. careening down an endless highway which appears on no maps, has no speed limits, no police patrols, and no exit or entrance ramps.''Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, who sponsored a Senate resolution last year that opposed signing the treaty unless certain conditions were met, said the signing ''blatantly contradicts the will of the United States Senate'' and dared President Clinton to submit it to the Senate, where a two-thirds vote is required for approval.''If this treaty is good enough to sign, it's good enough to be submitted to the Senate for an open, honest debate,'' he said. Environmental groups praised the signing, but some complained that the United States is not doing enough yet to reduce greenhouse gas.''Without a more vigorous commitment to domestic action, U.S. demands for more action by developing countries are like a chain-smoking parent telling his children that smoking is bad for them,'' said John Adams, president of the Natural Resources Defense Council. He urged the Administration to take unilateral steps to cut emissions of carbon dioxide from automobiles, power plants and other sources.

Negotiators in the Buenos Aires talks on global warming were locked in a last-minute struggle last night to resolve key questions. The matters seemed merely procedural but in reality went to the heart of the politically charged issue of how fast the world can and should move to deal with the prospect of climatic change. At issue were the shape and pace of the work schedule for putting flesh on the bones of the Kyoto Protocol, an agreement reached a year ago in Japan. Under it, industrialized countries committed themselves to make legally binding reductions in emissions of heat-trapping waste industrial gases like carbon dioxide. Mainstream scientists say that if the emissions are not reduced, the world's climate could be seriously disrupted in coming decades. As the Buenos Aires discussions opened on Nov. 2, virtually all major participants said the measure of their success would be the adoption of a work schedule. But as the 12 days of talks went well past their scheduled end of midnight Friday, no accord had been achieved. The work schedule is crucial because it would govern how soon operating rules are established. Not until then, assuming that the Kyoto Protocol is ratified by the required countries, including the United States, can the protocol take effect. Late in the day, the conference chairwoman, Maria Julia Alsogary of Argentina, circulated a draft proposal establishing a two-year deadline for fashioning the rules. As midnight approached, there was cautious optimism. ''I think it's likely we're going to reach closure, but the clock is ticking,'' said Dirk Forrister, a member of the American delegation. It was clear, he said, that the deadline would be extended: ''We're going to be going into the wee hours'' of this morning. At Kyoto the industrialized countries agreed to reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases by an average of about 5 percent below 1990 levels in the next 10 to 14 years. The gases are produced mainly by the burning of coal, oil, wood and natural gas. The United States' reduction would be 7 percent. Developing countries so far have no specific targets but are required in general to control their emissions. One of the two operational mechanisms established at Kyoto is called emissions trading. It would allow a country or private company to achieve its cuts partly by buying reductions from a country or company that has reduced its emissions more than required. In theory, the method's proponents say, that would bring about faster reductions at lower cost. They say this has been proved by an emissions trading system for reducing industrial sulfur dioxide emissions in the United States. The other arrangement, called the clean development mechanism, is intended to enable rich countries to invest in emissions reduction projects in poor countries. One example is high-efficiency power plants that emit less carbon. That way, in theory, the poor countries would reap environmental and economic benefits. The investor and the recipient would share credit for the emissions reductions achieved. One sticking point in Buenos Aires involved which of the two mechanisms should be given priority. Many developing countries, seeing the prospect of reaping new investment in their economies, wanted the rules for the clean development mechanism to be worked out first, on an accelerated schedule, with those for emissions trading completed later. The United States and other rich countries feared that if the clean development mechanism received first priority, developing countries would refuse to approve rules for emissions trading. Developing countries have been suspicious of emissions trading, fearing that it might be used an excuse for not reducing emissions. The United States therefore insisted that the two mechanisms move ahead on parallel tracks. As the Buenos Aires session moved into its final hours, the parallel-track idea appeared to be ascendant. Ms. Alsogaray's proposal would require that ''substantial progress'' on rules for the operating mechanisms be demonstrated a year from now, with a firm decision in two years.

INTERNATIONAL  A3-7Neither U.S. Nor Iraq Gives Way in Confrontation  President Clinton and Saddam Hussein made clear the vastness of the differences between them, offering contradictory analyses of the crisis and incompatible solutions. While calling Mr. Hussein's defiance of the United Nations unacceptable, Mr. Clinton did not issue an ultimatum and offered a small opening to Mr. Hussein to end the impasse. A1At the United Nations, representatives of France, Russia and China urged Secretary General Kofi Annan to go to Baghdad to try to persuade Mr. Hussein to back down. But Mr. Annan refused, saying he would go there only if such a mission were likely to succeed. A6More Air Force planes were sent to the Persian Gulf as the United States continued to build a force large enough to carry out a sustained bombing campaign. A6Riots in Indonesia Continue  At least eight people were killed and scores were injured as soldiers, students and thugs clashed in Jakarta. Parliament adopted several decrees intended to nudge Indonesia toward a more democratic future and voted to hold general elections next spring and to begin reforms. A1Motive of Attack Disclosed  One of the clear but unstated objectives of the American missile strike in Afghanistan last August was to kill Osama bin Laden and as many of his lieutenants as possible, Administration officials acknowledged. According to the officials, White House lawyers conducted a secret review in the months before the attack and concluded that such operations were legal under American and international law. A3Political Deal in Cambodia  Cambodia's rival political parties broke a three-month deadlock and agreed to a coalition government that left Hun Sen, who seized power in a coup last year, as sole Prime Minister. A7I.M.F. Announces Brazil Aid  The International Monetary Fund announced a $41.5 billion rescue package for the Brazilian economy that would require a level of sustained economic discipline and sacrifice that the largest nation in Latin America has not demonstrated in the past. A4Space Station Grounded  NASA and the Russian Space Agency have agreed to set aside a last-minute Russian request to launch an international space station into an orbit closer to Mir. A5Struggle at Talks on Climate  Negotiators in the Buenos Aires talks on global warming were locked in a last-minute struggle over the shape and pace of the work schedule for the Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement reached a year ago in Japan. A7World Briefing A6NATIONAL A8-11Clinton and Jones Agree To $850,000 Settlement  President Clinton agreed to pay Paula Corbin Jones $850,000 to settle her legal claim that he crudely propositioned her seven years ago. Ms. Jones dropped what she had once called her most important demand: that Mr. Clinton apologize and admit wrongdoing. Through his lawyer, the President continued to call Ms. Jones's accusation baseless. The settlement averted the possibility that an appeals court would reinstate her suit, and White House officials believe the settlement will help Mr. Clinton avoid impeachment. A1The independent counsel Kenneth W. Starr again indicted President Clinton's longtime friend, Webster L. Hubbell, left, in connection with the Whitewater matter. The 15-count indictment included the accusation that Mr. Hubbell had sought to conceal from Federal regulators actions of Hillary Rodham Clinton. A1Mr. Starr sent evidence concerning Kathleen E. Willey to the House Judiciary Committee, but did not say the material constituted grounds for impeachment. Ms. Willey accused the President of groping her in the White House. Mr. Clinton denied the assertion under oath. A10A Marine Corps officer who wrote a newspaper column rebuking President Clinton as an ''adulterous liar'' got the military equivalent of a stern talking-to from his commander, but was not otherwise punished. A10States' Tobacco Settlement  The nation's four biggest cigarette makers and officials of eight states have reached agreement on the outlines of a settlement designed to resolve all remaining state claims over health costs related to smoking, attorneys general and industry lawyers involved in the talks said. The plan would cost the tobacco companies $206 billion over 25 years and would restrict cigarette advertising and marketing, while eliminating the threat of state suits to recover the Medicaid costs of treating people with smoking-related illnesses. A1There is no shortage of proposals for how to spending New York's $20 billion share of the settlement. A9Church Charged in Death  Florida prosecutors filed criminal charges against an arm of the Church of Scientology, alleging abuse or neglect of a disabled adult and the unauthorized practice of medicine in connection with the death of a church member while she was under Scientologists' care. A8Preserving the Everglades  Officials in Florida decided to buy out hundreds of residents who live in an unincorporated area of west Miami-Dade County, in a move that environmentalists hailed as a significant step toward restoring the balance of water in the Everglades. A8Lawsuit Over a Shipwreck  Relatives of the crew of a pleasure ship lost during Hurricane Mitch have sued the vessel's owners for sending it to sea as the storm approached. A8NEW YORK/REGION  B1-721 Troubled City Schools Are Added to State's List  State Education Commissioner Richard Mills designated 21 New York City schools as failing, bringing the total number of failing schools in the city to 97, which is 3 more than last year. About 9 percent of the 1,100 schools in the city are now designated as failing; only four schools elsewhere in the state are on the list. B1Whitman Has Appendectomy  Governor Whitman of New Jersey had surgery in Morristown to remove her appendix. B4Officers Accuse an Officer  Two of the four officers facing Federal civil rights charges in the brutalization of Abner Louima have incriminated Officer Justin A. Volpe, according to court documents. B2Mother and Lost Son Reunited  A 15-year-old autistic boy found wandering in the Erie Lackawanna Terminal in Hoboken, N.J., on Tuesday was reunited with his mother. B3Record Price for Ruth Ball  The baseball that Babe Ruth hit for the first home run in Yankee Stadium was sold for $126,500, a record for a baseball sold at auction. B3ARTS & IDEAS B9-17Resignations of Protest  Two prominent American poets, both women, have resigned as chancellors of the Academy of American Poets to protest the absence of blacks and other minority groups on the academy's board of chancellors. B9SPORTS  D1-6OBITUARIES  C16Red Holzman  The coach who led the New York Knicks to their only two N.B.A. championships. He was 78. C16BUSINESS DAY  C1-15Consolidating Auto Industry  More large mergers are likely among auto makers because of a worldwide excess of assembly plants and the just completed marriage of Daimler-Benz and Chrysler, industry leaders said in interviews. C1Uncertain Markets Await Fed  The stock market finished mixed as investors looked toward the Fed meeting on Tuesday. The Dow rose 89.85 points, to 8,919.59, and the S.& P. 500 climbed 8.03, to 1,125.72. But the Nasdaq fell 3.07, to 1,847.99. The price of the 30-year Treasury bond rose 2/32 , to 1004/32 , while its yield fell to 5.24 percent from 5.25 percent. C1Retail sales rose in October at the fastest pace in five months and producer prices crept higher, leading some economists to predict that the Fed would not cut rates. C2Business Digest C1EDITORIAL  A12-13Editorials: Lawsuits against handguns; the case of Jonathan Pollard; Brazil gets a loan; Verlyn Klinkenborg on winter. Columns: Frank Rich. Bridge B16Weather B18Crossword B15

To the Editor:Re ''U.S. Signs a Pact to Reduce Gases Tied to Warming'' (front page, Nov. 13): I do not agree with those who suggest that implementation of the Kyoto Protocol would be expensive. The studies that usually support such estimates assume a significant increase in energy demand over current levels and that the current energy consumption is ''economically optimal.''Demand projections have been more often wrong than right, and fossil fuel prices do not cover their full social costs. The phase-out of subsidies and tax breaks for fossil fuels would provide significant economic benefits just by removing distortions. The Government also indirectly supports fossil fuel consumption through highway construction and the like. EDGAR HERTWICH  Berkeley, Calif., Nov. 13, 1998The writer is a Ph. D. candidate, Energy & Resources Group, University of California at Berkeley.

To the Editor:Your Nov. 11 editorial ''Remember Global Warming'' says more companies would start reducing their emissions sooner if ''some way could be found to reward companies for taking action now,'' such as credits to meet obligations that will come into effect later. Such a method -- the proposed clean development mechanism -- is on the table at the post-Kyoto conference in Buenos Aires. Under the mechanism, companies could assist development projects wanted by developing countries, using advanced cleaner technologies, and obtain credits for the avoided emissions. It remains for the Buenos Aires negotiators to realize that the clean development mechanism offers a win-win method. PAUL D. BOYD  Atlantic Highlands, N.J., Nov. 11, 1998

To the Editor:You write (editorial, Nov. 11) that ''nobody has successfully challenged the urgency'' of the Kyoto-Buenos Aires mission to cut greenhouse gas emissions. May I, as a scientist who has no links whatsoever with the fossil fuel industry, do so now? The agenda of the Kyoto-Buenos Aires summit meetings has proved dangerous. It has given the world a false idea that we can halt climate change. It has detracted from our recognition of the fact that gradual, catastrophic and unpredictable climate change is the norm. It has tried to replace adaptation to change by control of change. And it prevents us from facing the real problem: the need for political, economic and social systems to cope with the risk of change from any direction. PHILIP STOTT  Gravesend, England, Nov. 12, 1998The writer is a professor of biogeography, University of London.

After an all-night session in Buenos Aires, negotiators from more than 150 countries early yesterday set a deadline of two years for adopting operational rules for cutting emissions of waste industrial gases that are believed to cause global warming. With that, proponents of the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty under which the reductions are to be made, declared victory in the two-week round of talks. Expectations were low going in: United Nations officials, American diplomats and environmentalists said at the outset that they would consider the Buenos Aires meeting a success if it adopted a work program for fleshing out the Kyoto Protocol. That was done. But beyond that, the treaty's backers said the conference revealed a shift in the worldwide debate on how to deal with the possibility of disruptive climate change brought about by emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases, mainly carbon dioxide, which is produced by the burning of oil, coal, wood and natural gas. Buenos Aires made clear, they said, that both industry and developing countries were becoming more engaged in the effort to control emissions and in trying to make the Kyoto Protocol eventually work. Under the protocol, negotiated last December in Japan, industrialized countries agreed to accept legally binding reductions in greenhouse gases averaging about 5 percent below 1990 levels from 2008 to 2012. The protocol set up a number of mechanisms that was said to achieve the cuts most effectively and at least cost. Chief among them was a plan to allow countries to trade in emission rights, and another plan, called the clean development mechanism, to allow rich countries to invest in emissions-reducing enterprises in developing nations. Last Wednesday, Argentina became the first developing country to announce that it would assume binding targets and timetables for controlling emissions. Kazakhstan followed. Honduras led a Latin American proposal to speed up introduction of the advent of the clean development mechanism. Some African nations expressed interest in becoming more involved. All of this led Stuart Eizenstat, the chief American negotiator, to declare a ''sea change in attitude'' after the talks concluded. At the same time, he said, many businesses have abandoned a posture of hard opposition to emissions reduction in favor of being actively constructive. A number of big companies, including General Motors, Monsanto, Shell and British Petroleum, have recently adopted such a stance, and Mr. Eizenstat said yesterday that their representatives seemed to outnumber fossil-fuel industry hard-liners in Buenos Aires. But Mr. Eizenstat pointed out there was still considerable opposition to the Kyoto Protocol in the ranks of industry. The two biggest and most influential developing countries, China and India, continued to take a hard line against any sort of specific emissions reduction targets for poor nations until rich ones are actually reducing theirs. And not everyone agreed with the Eizenstat assessment. ''I don't think the business community is split,'' William F. O'Keefe, a spokesman for the American Petroleum Institute, said this week. While a number of companies are indeed taking a constructive course, he said, few support the Kyoto Protocol as the way to deal with the problem. In general, the fossil-fuel industry and conservative American politicians continue to portray the protocol as a misbegotten instrument that will not work and will be too costly to the American economy. Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, said in Buenos Aires, as he has for the last year, that the protocol will never be ratified by the  Senate. Under the rules of ratification adopted in Kyoto, the protocol cannot go into effect if the United States does not approve it. Senator Hagel also minimized the significance of the actions by Argentina and Kazakhstan, noting that there were 132 other developing countries. Now that countries are coming to grips with what was decided in Kyoto, he said, ''the cold stone wall of fact and reality has set in, and I think from here on it gets pretty tough.''Mr. Eizenstat agreed. ''There are still very, very daunting challenges,'' he said. Nevertheless, proponents hailed the modest achievements of Buenos Aires. The agreement on a deadline for fleshing out the protocol ''insures that the nations of the world will continue moving forward against the threat of global warming,'' Vice President Al Gore said. Fred Krupp, executive director of the Environmental Defense Fund, said the talks had resulted in ''forward progress'' and ''major strides.'' He said the talks marked the start of ''a whole new phase'' in which people are beginning to understand the value of market mechanisms in reducing emissions.

Asia's economic collapse will depress oil and gasoline prices for nearly a decade, saving motorists in the United States about 13 cents a gallon in 2000 alone, the Energy Department said this week. While the Asian crisis has already helped to lower energy costs, the report offers by far the strongest evidence that the effects will be deep and long-lasting. In the United States, continued low energy prices are likely to limit inflation, economists say. Weak Asian demand and heavy global production also reduce the nation's vulnerability to any sudden disruption of oil imports, which account for about half of America's demand. But the low oil and gasoline prices also hamper the fight against global warming. With oil at $13 or $15 a barrel, there are few economic incentives for saving energy or using renewable energy sources to reduce pollution that is blamed for global warming. The oil glut has also resulted from falling production costs and the opening of new regions. The Energy Department expects higher production from the Caspian Sea, the North Sea and the waters off West Africa, as well as from Mexico, Colombia and Brazil. While some oil companies are trimming their investments, many are too far along on projects to turn back, said Jay Hakes, chief of the department's Energy Information Administration, which issued the report. The 13-cent-a-gallon savings in the year 2000 are from the prices forecast if there had been no Asian crisis. Analysts at the Energy Department and the oil companies doubt that oil prices will necessarily remain at the present levels of less than $13 a barrel. The partial resumption of Iraqi output has recently forced prices down, leaving unleaded regular gasoline at less than $1 a gallon. The Energy Department, relying on economic forecasts by DRI/McGraw Hill, sees Asia recovering so slowly that the average oil price in the year 2000, adjusted for inflation, will still be less than $14 a barrel. That price is about $5.50 a barrel less than the $19.50 the department predicted last year.''Last year we were sort of seeing this like Mexico,'' said Mr. Hakes, referring to that country's crisis four years ago. ''Where there were economic problems, they bounced back pretty quickly. This year we are seeing it as more sustained.''He cautions that it is unclear how quickly Asia will recapture foreign investment. But even if energy demand there soars once again, he says, global production can keep up. Joseph Stanislaw, president of Cambridge Energy Research Associates, agreed that Asia's situation had reshaped the oil market. ''The upward moving balloon of demand has been pierced by the Asian crisis,'' he said. Oil companies, already trying to cut their staffs and economize, have been pessimistic about prices for the next few years. Mark Moody-Stuart, chairman of Royal Dutch/Shell, the world's largest oil company, recently predicted prices of $12 to $16 a barrel over the next two to three years. While oil producers like Mexico and Russia might suffer, low oil prices are a boon for the United States, reducing not only inflation but also the trade deficit. Continued low prices and rising consumption of fossil fuels, including coal, will raise carbon emissions in about the year 2010 by 33 percent over the 1990 level, the agency predicts. To comply with the Kyoto agreement to slow global warming, the United States has pledged to reduce emissions over this period by 10 percent from the 1990 level.

After tornadoes, El Nino rains and an ice storm swept across large swaths of the country, Congress enacted an emergency spending measure in May providing $2.6 billion in natural disaster relief. Deep inside that bill, though, in a last-minute addition, the oil industry won a big concession: relief of $66 million from the amount owed for extracting oil from Federal lands. Then in October, with Congress wrangling over a huge spending bill and eager to cut deals and leave town, the oil industry won again as the House leadership reaffirmed that relief. Indeed, in the end, Congress even sweetened the deal a bit, by extending the break a little longer. Such is the power of Big Oil in Washington, and two of the biggest players in this monolithic and highly effective industry lobby are the Exxon Corporation and the Mobil Corporation. Rich in cash, aggressive in style, with issues ranging from foreign policy to taxes and the environment, they have been effective in pushing their agenda through behind-the-scenes contacts at the highest level of Government and through arm-twisting in Congress.''Some companies have a narrow range of interests to lobby on,'' said Jennifer Shecter, a researcher at the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit group that tracks Washington lobbying. ''But, by its very nature, oil is so pervasive and it is so affected by Government policy that they care about everything.''With the oil and gas industry generally marching, and lobbying, in lockstep, it is often hard to separate Exxon and Mobil from their rivals. While somewhat different in their approaches, both companies are big supporters of the American Petroleum Institute, an industry trade association that spent $3.7 million on lobbying in 1997. They often join industry coalitions created to lobby about a specific topic -- the lifting of sanctions to oil-producing nations like Iraq, for example, or the ability of American oil companies to swap oil with Iran. By themselves, Exxon and Mobil have a combined total of 15 full-time lobbyists on their payrolls in Washington, and employ other Washington lawyers and lobbying firms as well. Last year, Mobil spent $5.3 million on Federal lobbying and Exxon spent $5.2 million, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Combined, this would make them the fifth-largest entity in spending on lobbying the Federal Government. As multinational corporations with businesses in far-flung spots, Exxon and Mobil's interests in Washington touch on many trade and finance issues. The two companies have won favorable tax rulings before the Internal Revenue Service and the Treasury Department concerning the use of foreign tax credits to reduce their United States tax bill. They are sensitive to the State Department's Middle East and Asian policies, especially since oil is often found in pariah nations such as Libya, Myanmar and Iran. They are generally supportive of Arab nations. And new issues, like the proposed Caspian Sea pipeline route -- a region where Mobil has operations -- have engaged them.''They are probably most effective behind the scenes,'' said Martin Lobel, a Washington lawyer who represents consumer groups and small oil companies. ''They'll get their economists and lawyers to see the I.R.S. and the companies will stay relatively hidden. You've got maybe two Ph. D economists in the entire I.R.S. and Exxon can hire as many as they want. We were once in a big battle with Exxon on the issue of oil overcharges and there must have been 30 economists on the other side.''Edward Rothschild, a senior associate with Podesta Associates, a Washington lobbying firm, said that the two companies' lobbying on complicated tax issues had paid off handsomely.''There's a lot of esoteric issues, especially in taxes, but which are worth hundreds of millions of dollars,'' he said. ''There were efforts by the Clinton Administration in the last two budget bills to reduce the value of the foreign tax credits. But Exxon and the industry descended and those provisions were quietly eliminated. I don't know who they talked to, but they got the job done.''While Exxon and Mobil are usually allied on industry issues, each has a different operating style: Exxon is more aloof and somewhat diffident about how it is perceived; Mobil is quicker to defend its public image and more willing to enter the political fray. Exxon's brashness was evident when the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill, one of the worst environmental catastrophes in United States history, became a giant tax break, as the company wrote off all disaster-related expenses -- including legal bills and cleanup costs. Mobil makes few campaign contributions, while Exxon is a leading donor to the Republican Party and candidates. In the 1996 Presidential election cycle, Exxon contributed $593,928, donating 95 percent to Republicans; in the last Congressional races, Exxon gave $475,855, 84 percent to Republicans. This G.O.P. tilt could help the companies in the next Congress: the three new top House leaders are all Republicans from the Oil Patch: the House Speaker, Bob Livingston of Louisiana; the majority leader, Dick Armey of Texas, and J. C. Watts of Oklahoma, the party's new conference chairman. On Capitol Hill, Exxon and Mobil opposed the Clinton Adminstration's efforts to gain Senate approval of the Kyoto Protocol, an international treaty to curb global warming that had won support by other oil companies like Royal Dutch/Shell Group and British Petroleum. And, in the last Congress, they won significant victories to halt the Interior and Treasury Departments' efforts to get oil companies to pay more in royalties for oil and gas extracted from Federal lands and pay back some $345.5 million in past royalties that the Interior Department says is owed. The Justice Department has even filed suit to collect these royalties; last August, Mobil spent $56.5 million to settle these claims. Meanwhile, in Congress, Exxon leads an industry effort to pay royalties owed to the Government in oil rather than in cash -- a proposal the Government strongly opposes.''The oil companies lobby in a very coordinated way,'' said a staff member for a House energy-related committee, who spoke on the condition that neither he not his committee be identified. ''They rely heavily on the American Petroleum Institute, but they've also got their people. Exxon's lobbyist is very friendly and outgoing and the company is really involved in the royalty issue. On a technical point, Exxon's lobbyist will bring in 11 people to talk to you about it. They are incredibly influential.''Lynn Russo, an Exxon spokeswoman, said it was too early to tell how the company's lobbying would be affected by the merger, a view shared by Donald Turk, a spokesman for Mobil. Mobil does plan to continue paying for op-ed newspaper ads and for the ''Masterpiece Theater'' television series through 1999, Mr. Turk said. If history is any guide, the companies' lobbying expenses will undoubtedly rise while the merger faces Federal scrutiny: The Bell Atlantic Corporation's lobbying costs shot up to $15.6 million at the time of its merger with Nynex, and the Boeing Company's costs rose to $10 million as it was acquiring McDonnell Douglas. Still, the specter of a combined Exxon-Mobil juggernaut on the Potomac scares some. ''They will be so huge and interested in an incredible number of issues,'' said Charles Lewis, executive director of the Center for Public Integrity, a Washington nonprofit group. ''They'll come up with new lobbying battlegrounds.''

A YEAR ago, representatives of more than 150 nations faced a midnight deadline in Kyoto, Japan, for talks on an agreement to cut emissions of the gases that scientists warn may be warming the planet. After delegates caucused, argued, slumped and snored through the night -- and toward lunchtime, a pact was reached when the session's chairman decreed that an important conflict would be dealt with later. In November of this year, delegates from the same nations gathered in Buenos Aires to set a timetable to carry out the pact. Afterward, delegates were heartened by the progress they had made; they broke up in time for breakfast, with a firm agreement to work a few more years on the pact's biggest obstacles. Such is the current status of the international effort to limit global warming: the work that has been done has produced a consensus that something will come of the Kyoto gathering. But the conflicts that clouded the accord have not grown easier to resolve, and time is racing by. The United States, long the leading emitter of greenhouses gases, is caught up in this delay. To be sure, the highlight of the Buenos Aires conference was the Clinton Administration's signing of the Kyoto accord. But the American representatives made it clear that they would not submit the agreement to the Senate for approval until many of the Administration's demands are met.  Negotiators at the conference settled on an ambitious two-year timetable for resolving those and other sticking points. But that means approval cannot come until after the 2000 elections, if it occurs at all.''Kyoto is not dead,'' said Eileen Claussen, a former State Department negotiator who is the executive director of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, a public-interest group. ''But I don't know if this can be done in two years.''Michael Oppenheimer, a climate expert for the Environmental Defense Fund, an  advocacy group that favors the treaty, said: ''If significant progress is not made by the year 2000, we will never make the 2008 deadlines of the treaty. We have to get the rules in place, or the time will slip away.''Groups representing fossil-fuel producers and users are even more skeptical. ''I don't think the protocol is ever going to be ratified,'' said Connie Holmes, the chairwoman of the Global Climate Coalition, which opposes the agreement. ''In about 2001 or 2002, people are going to say, 'My God, we can't do this, let's stretch this thing out.' You need more time if you are going to change as radically as this.''Without the United States on board, the world will not meet the targets of the Kyoto Protocol, which calls for industrial countries to drastically cut their greenhouse gas emissions between 2008 and 2012. The United States is supposed to cut its emissions by more than a third, to a level 7 percent lower than 1990. But the Americans are insisting on commitments from the developing world, and on a complex scheme for trading emissions permits and credits. ''On all these issues, the biggest obstacles are political, not technical,'' Ms. Claussen said. ''Technical people could sit down and work out the details. But it all boils down to politics and sovereignty.''Here are the main issues that need to be resolved in the Kyoto Protocol:The Third World's RolePROBLEM: The United States and other developed nations account for about 60 percent of industrial greenhouse gases given off each year. But developing nations, led by China and India, are expected to catch up in about 15 years. By mid-century, they will account for most of the long-term buildup of gases that threaten the climate. SOLUTION: The United States says that the least expensive way to head off global warming may be to cut future emissions in other countries overseas. To entice third-world nations to pursue such a path, America favors a ''clean development mechanism,'' which would give donor nations credit for foreign aid or investments that cut emissions in developing countries. OBSTACLE: China and India are still resisting calls for big developing countries to promise emissions cuts. African and Latin American countries are more interested, but they want guarantees that they will get their share of the aid. OUTLOOK: ''The monolithic phalanx that we saw in Kyoto in opposition to any and all participation has completely broken down,'' said Stuart E. Eizenstat, the chief American negotiator. In Buenos Aires, Kazakhstan and Argentina agreed to commit themselves to reductions. International TradingPROBLEM: It will cost a lot of money to control greenhouse gases -- especially on the rapid timetable that the United States is being asked to meet. If these costs are too high, the Senate will not support the treaty. SOLUTION: Many economists say the way to keep costs down is to let countries buy and sell emissions quotas, making the deepest cuts where it is cheapest to do so. The United States would be able to buy its way into compliance with the treaty by paying other industrial countries, like Russia, to cut emissions more than the treaty required. OBSTACLE: European nations are the biggest opponents of unfettered trading in emission credits. They are demanding that the United States achieve at least a majority of its emissions reductions within its own borders. Many third-world nations, too, have objected that it is unfair for rich countries to buy their way out of treaty obligations. OUTLOOK: Mr. Oppenheimer at the Environmental Defense Fund, which favors emissions trading and other market-based pollution controls, says that other nations, realizing how important trading is to the United States, are ''holding it hostage'' as a bargaining chip. But schisms among developing nations are weakening their resistance, and Europeans are recognizing that they need to make concessions to the Americans if the treaty is to work. Credit for Early ActionPROBLEM: Every year that goes by without controls on greenhouse gas emissions makes it harder for the United States and other industrial nations to comply with their targets. Emissions in the United States are currently 10 percent higher than they were in 1990; they rose 1.4 percent in 1997, and the Energy Department expects this trend to continue for another 20 years. SOLUTION: Many companies have already invested in energy saving and other approaches to cut their emissions, or are planning to do so soon. To encourage early reductions, legislation has been introduced to give these companies credits for their reductions, which could be used or sold if binding limits on emissions were imposed. OBSTACLE: Many treaty opponents in Congress have fought policy measures, like tax cuts. They have even fought voluntary steps that suggest back-door implementation of an unratified treaty. OUTLOOK: Big companies, even some that would prefer no binding limits on emissions, are lobbying hard to get credits for early action, just in case. ''This is really the one area involving the whole issue of greenhouse gases where I think everybody ought to be able to agree,'' said Todd Stern, the White House official who coordinates the Administration's climate policy. Finally, participants are wondering how the American Presidential elections will affect the negotiating timetable -- especially the aspirations of Vice President Al Gore, the world leader most closely associated with the fight against global warming.''How does the process of moving toward the year 2000 play with the Presidential election campaign, and with President Clinton's known desire to make progress before he leaves office?'' Mr. Oppenheimer asked. ''Those questions are not imponderable, but they are very big factors, and they make it very hard to figure out where the process will be two years from now.''

Even as a proposed treaty on global warming faces an uncertain future in the Senate, big companies are maneuvering to push through legislation giving them valuable credits for early actions to control the waste gases that the binding treaty would strictly limit. The proposed treaty, negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, and signed by the Clinton Administration last year, requires steep reductions in the industrial nations' emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases. If the Senate eventually approves it despite widespread opposition from major industries, companies want to be sure they get credit for any reductions they achieve before the treaty takes force in 2008. The legislation would mark a significant shift in the debate in the Senate over climate change, potentially moderating the opposition to the treaty among big industry groups and linking their financial interests to the goals of treaty supporters. And if it succeeded, it could revive the longstanding efforts of the Administration to persuade industries to cut their emissions voluntarily, which have met with mixed success.''This is a potential winner,'' said Eileen Claussen, executive director of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change and a former treaty negotiator for the Administration. ''It helps get the United States moving. It is voluntary. It is supported by industry. It seems to me there should be a way to get legislation like that through Congress.''For some companies, credits earned now could be applied against strict limits they would face later. Companies able to make even deeper cuts in emissions now could sell their surplus credits for billions of dollars under an emissions trading system that the Administration wants to set up. With so much at stake, big companies, joined by influential environmental groups and policy analysts, are already lobbying hard for Congress to guarantee credits for early action. Three Senators, led by John H. Chafee of Rhode Island, the leading Republican environmentalist in the Senate, introduced legislation late in the last session that would assure the companies that their early reductions would earn credit under any mechanism the Government eventually establishes to limit emissions of greenhouse gases. The bill is also supported by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, a Democrat, and by Senator Connie Mack of Florida, a Republican. In a speech last month to the National Association of Manufacturers, Senator Chafee, who is chairman of the Senate Environment Committee, said he will make the bill a priority as soon as Congress reconvenes next week.''While the climate debate will indeed continue over the next few years, we strongly believe that there is a voluntary, incentive-based approach which can be implemented now,'' he told the group, which has opposed the Kyoto treaty.''The good guys who take action now will be rewarded by having these actions count,'' Mr. Chafee said. ''This credit program may also make early greenhouse gas reductions financially valuable to the companies who make them.''That could mean a windfall for companies that have recorded reductions in greenhouse gas emissions since 1991, a period when the nation's overall annual emissions ballooned by more than 10 percent despite the Administration's voluntary plan to curtail them. As drafted, the bill gives ton-for-ton credits to any of the more than 150 companies that can document reductions in their greenhouse gas emissions under various voluntary Federal programs. The DuPont company is one example. The biggest chemical producer in the United States, DuPont has taken steps that will cut its own emissions of greenhouse gases far more and much faster than the treaty would require. Company officials said that DuPont will cut its annual greenhouse gas emissions to much less than half of 1991's levels by the year 2000. Under the treaty, the United States as a whole would have to cut emissions 7 percent below 1990's level between 2008 and 2012.''If you did not recognize our voluntary work, you would punish us for stepping out in front,'' said Darwin G. Wika, director of safety, health and the environment for DuPont. ''And the laggards who did not step up to the plate would be rewarded.''By DuPont's calculations, by the end of this year it will have reduced its annual emissions by the equivalent of 90 million tons of carbon dioxide. Economists' estimates of the value of carbon credits in an emissions trading scheme vary widely, but depending on the crediting rules, DuPont's savings alone could someday be worth billions of dollars. Some big environmental groups, like the Environmental Defense Fund, which favors emissions trading and other market-based pollution controls, have published detailed proposals for granting credits to companies that move early, and have advised lawmakers on drafting legislation. There are at least five such proposals spelled out by various advocates, including one by Niagara Mohawk, the New York utility company. But some environmentalists have criticized the bill offered by the three Senators. John Stanton, legislative director for the National Environmental Trust, a pro-treaty advocacy group, said the bill ''does not provide sufficient guarantees that emission reductions credited under it will actually result from reduced emissions, as opposed to phantom paper reductions.''With Senator Chafee planning hearings soon, the lobbying is sure to intensify.''You are creating a new currency called carbon-dioxide tons,'' said Alden Meyer of the Union of Concerned Scientists, another treaty advocacy group. ''There is a lot of money involved, and there is going to be a lot of ferocious jockeying to control who gets the money. It is going to be pretty intense.''For now, the most active proponents of credit for early action are a closely knit coterie of former Government officials, policy analysts, environmental advocates, lobbyists, lawyers and corporate officials who have been working for months to build support for the credit idea. Along with the Environmental Defense Fund and the Pew Center for Global Climate Change, they include law firms and lobbyists like Van Ness Feldman and Alcalde & Fay, both of which represent several electric utilities, and a number of individual companies, several of them aligned with the Pew Center. Hundreds of companies, big and small, could benefit from the proposal. In 1997, the latest year for which data is available, companies participating in voluntary reductions of greenhouse gases reported to the Energy Department that they had reduced greenhouse gas emissions by the equivalent of 137 million tons of carbon dioxide. Under the bill, all of them would qualify for credits. The companies, which filed detailed reports about more than 1,200 emission control projects, included 156 participants in more than a dozen different industries. Most of them are electric utilities, but other types of companies are increasingly participating. Even one individual filed a report in 1995. Carter H. Lewis 3d, who at the time was a consultant for the Energy Department, claimed to have cut his personal emissions of carbon dioxide by between three and four tons by never having more than one light at a time turned on in his house, and by commuting to work outside of rush hours to save gasoline.''I just wanted to demonstrate what the ordinary citizen could do,'' he said. ''You don't have to be a gigantic power plant to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.'' (The reductions he claimed, however, would have only a trivial market value.)Although the number of participants has increased steadily, for the past few years the amount of reductions in emissions that they claimed has been falling. In 1996 it was the equivalent of 154 million tons of carbon dioxide, and in 1995 it was 183 million tons. There is considerable debate whether actions taken years ago should be granted credits.''To the extent the credit is regarded as an incentive to spur industry to make greenhouse gas reductions that would not otherwise occur, there is little basis for rewarding reductions already achieved,'' said the report, written for the Pew Center by Robert Nordhaus and Stephen Fotis of Van Ness Feldman. On the other hand, they noted, companies that signed onto the Administration's voluntary programs may have relied on the Government's representations that they would be granted appropriate credits. The General Accounting Office, which investigated the Energy Department's reporting system, found some flaws that suggest that the claims may be exaggerated. The agency noted that the Energy Department does not verify that claimed reductions are actually achieved. Companies have used many different strategies for reducing their emissions. DuPont, officials said, not only has cut its energy consumption, but invested millions of dollars changing its processes for making adipic acid powder, a chemical feedstock. The new approach eliminates most emissions of nitrous oxides, like carbon dioxide a potent greenhouse gas that would be controlled by the treaty. American Forests, a conservation group, has filed annual reports with the Energy Department describing hundreds of tree-planting projects that could offset carbon dioxide emissions because growing trees remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and store the carbon as wood. So far, the organization has planted more than 8 million trees, which it calculates will offset 2.3 million tons of carbon dioxide or lock up 634,000 tons of carbon. Credits for those tons could easily become worth millions of dollars to the organization in the future. Many electric utilities have argued that they have achieved reductions in carbon dioxide emissions by operating their nuclear power plants more efficiently, reducing the need to burn coal in other power plants. Some utilities have filed reports with the Energy Department claiming millions of tons of reductions of this kind, even as their total emissions of carbon dioxide have continued to increase. Duke Power Company, for example, reported that its total annual emissions of carbon dioxide increased from about 24 million tons in 1990 to about 36 million tons in 1996, an increase of 50 percent. It said, however, that its more efficient use of nuclear power between 1993 and 1996 prevented an additional 35 million tons of carbon dioxide from being added to the atmosphere. Credit for those tons could be very important to Duke if it is told to sharply limit its emissions between 2008 and 2012 to help comply with the global warming treaty.

In November the Clinton Administration signed a treaty, negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, that purports to temper ''global warming'' by imposing a schedule of emissions reductions on so-called greenhouse gases. The action was widely regarded as a public relations move, pure and simple, because the Senate has voted overwhelmingly -- 95 to 0 -- to reject the treaty as written. But if there is no chance of the treaty's protocols going into effect, why are large blocs of corporate America booking seats on the Kyoto Express? The explanation is that they are being seduced by the promise of getting credits for any reductions in emissions they achieve before the Kyoto treaty would take effect in 2008, and in some cases for reductions already achieved. For some companies, the emissions credits earned now could be applied against the strict limits they would face later. And corporations able to make even deeper cuts in emissions now could sell their surplus credits for billions of dollars under a trading system that the Clinton Administration wants to set up. Some large utilities, for example, would benefit, while the petroleum industry would be hurt. The emissions-credit plan is the brainchild of John Chafee of Rhode Island, the leading Republican environmentalist in the Senate, who worked with Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut, a Democrat, and Senator Connie Mack of Florida, a Republican. These three Senators, honorable men all, seem to believe they have found a ''third way'' between pro-Kyoto and anti-Kyoto forces. The stated rationale for their approach is clear enough. Awarding early credits to companies that reduce emissions might encourage a trend toward cutting back on greenhouse gas production. This would win points with the global warming crowd. And the plan also looks attractive to industries, which would find it advantageous to reduce in advance the long-term costs of the Kyoto treaty, or some domestic version of it, and to secure some tangible gain in return. As usual, though, there is no real third way. Proposals like the one introduced by Senator Chafee and his colleagues will inevitably divide the business community between winners, who can achieve large windfalls, and losers, who will face the full brunt of any emissions controls. The result will be to push the pendulum toward a plan closer to that drawn up in Kyoto. Unfortunately, this dynamic of giving special breaks to individual companies is all too familiar. It explains why, for example, we have a Federal tax code with rates much higher than they need to be, but with many exemptions, privileges and special rules accorded to favored industries and activities in the form of credits, deductions, exclusions from income and the like. It represents a cynical bargain between big business and the Federal Government, with the corporations acceding to unreasonably high rates in exchange for special benefits. In 1996, the National Commission on Economic Growth and Tax Reform, also known as the Kemp Commission, a private organization created at the request of then Senator Bob Dole and House Speaker Newt Gingrich, found that ''the history of our tax code, in economic terms, mirrors the course of most addictions: advancing dependence, diminished returns and deteriorating health of the afflicted.''The Kyoto treaty and its progeny portend a repetition of that experience, only on a global scale. The treaty would create a vast array of bureaucrats, at home and abroad, who would employ vague standards, arbitrary conditions and dubious science to allocate economic rights and privileges. Bad as the existing tax system is, most of us agree the Government must have some mechanism for raising revenue. But it's not clear at all that we need any regulatory structure for limiting ''greenhouse gases,'' so shaky is the science on which the treaty is based. There is little hard evidence that internationally enforceable emissions limits, implicitly intended to wean us away from use of fossil fuels, will actually slow global warming. What is more, the Kyoto treaty has not yet devised clear-cut rules governing emissions trading. They are still being negotiated. The Kyoto treaty is unlikely to be approved by the Senate because control over much of the American economy would be forfeited to international bureaucrats. It would also impose huge new costs on that same economy and cost jobs. This would have the result of transferring  wealth from country to country, industry to industry and company to company. The accord's strictures would apply to developed nations but not, conspicuously, to developing nations like China and Paraguay. Ceding power to unelected global authorities would be a hard sell, even if the science behind Kyoto were compelling. Surrendering power on that scale for the sake of a vague, arbitrary promise of modest financial relief doesn't make sense for any American business. We must therefore guard against a milder version of the Kyoto treaty that would serve the same purpose, offering concessions to companies that acquiesce in creating the biggest global regulatory regime yet conceived. Let's not put a more appealing face on a treaty that cannot possibly help our economy and is likely to do it immense harm. Jack Kemp is a co-director of Empower America. Fred L. Smith Jr. is president of the Competitive Enterprise Institute.

To the Editor:Jack Kemp and Fred L. Smith Jr. (Op-Ed, Jan. 13) use familiar bugaboos -- ''unelected global authorities'' and ''immense harm'' to the American economy -- to make their argument against the Kyoto Protocol on global warming. There's no need for concern about ''unelected global authorities.'' The emission-credit plan is a United States initiative, separate from, although similar to a provision of, the Kyoto treaty. Because it is an American law, there would be no role for ''unelected global authorities.'' Moreover, while the Kyoto plan may hurt certain sectors of the American economy in the short term, the plan opens up new opportunities for green industry. While jobs are lost in one area, like petrochemicals, won't others open up in alternative-energy production and anti-emission technology? There are many industries that have fallen prey to the march of time, but there are always new ones to take their place. ANTHONY G. WAHL  Philadelphia, Jan. 13, 1999

To the Editor:Jack Kemp and Fred L. Smith Jr. (Op-Ed, Jan. 13) argue that the Kyoto treaty would mean ''ceding power to unelected global authorities.'' In fact, the Kyoto treaty is an attempt to bring the political process to bear on a group of powerful, unelected global authorities: the fossil fuel and automotive industries. Mr. Kemp and Mr. Smith breezily dismiss the abundant evidence that indicates a human impact on global climate. However, if the growing scientific consensus is correct, then a small group of unaccountable industries will, through their production of greenhouse gases, exercise a profound negative impact on the economic prospects, health and quality of life globally. PETER F. CANNAVO  Cambridge, Mass., Jan. 14, 1999

To the Editor:One of the biggest problems discussed at Kyoto was the rapid industrialization currently under way across Asia, especially in China and India. As the living standards rise in these countries, pollution will rapidly escalate, with global consequences (Op-Ed, Jan. 13). The developed world has no moral authority to ask developing countries to tackle these environmental problems if it has not already put its own house in order. Without a lead from the United States, this simply will not happen. DOMINIC SYMONS  London, Jan. 13, 1999

To the Editor:Re ''Beware of the Kyoto Compromise'' (Op-Ed, Jan. 13): It is refreshing to hear the Kyoto treaty denounced openly. The most important point about the treaty is that it is based on very weak science. For example, the climate models that it relies on are based primarily on computer models and land-based data. These data are not as accurate as data gathered from balloons and satellites that  can be taken more evenly around the world at a variety of elevations that are not skewed by local city heating. RACHAEL LUDWICK  Tucson, Ariz., Jan. 13, 1999

To the Editor:Re ''Beware of the Kyoto Compromise'' (Op-Ed, Jan. 13): Global warming is here. The overwhelming majority of atmospheric scientists accept the conclusion that the significant increase in the earth's temperature is due, at least in part, to the entrapment of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Some large companies, including Monsanto, Shell and British Petroleum, have already accepted their responsibility in abating global warming, and have reduced their greenhouse gas emissions significantly. These actions did not cost these companies a fortune, but rather often increased their efficiency and reduced the cost of their operations. Most Scandinavian countries and some Mediterranean countries already tax fossil fuels and other sources of greenhouse gas emissions quite heavily. The revenues derived from those taxes are often used to shift taxes, permitting the reduction of overall taxes or the reduction of taxes on societally beneficial technologies. TSVI MEIDAV  Berkeley, Calif., Jan. 14, 1999The writer is a geophysicist.

The United States and other industrial countries may find it easier and cheaper than expected to comply with a proposed treaty to fight global warming, thanks largely to reduced fuel consumption in Russia, the Government's energy-forecasting agency said today. Because the agreement on global warming allows international trading of pollution credits as a way to control emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases like those that come from burning fossil fuels, more of the cuts that the treaty seeks may come from the former Soviet Union and less from the United States, the Energy Information Administration said in its annual long-range forecast. That would mean that the United States, the world's leading source of greenhouse gases, could meet the treaty's targets without completely reversing its recent increases in emissions, which have grown with energy use as the domestic economy blossomed. But substantial reductions in emissions would still be needed. The agreement, negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997 and signed last year by the Clinton Administration, has not been ratified by the Senate, where it faces significant opposition from lawmakers who say it would be too costly and would cause disruptive cuts in energy use. The Kyoto Protocol calls for the United States to cut its emissions of greenhouse gases within 10 to 15 years to a level 7 percent below its emissions in 1990. Emissions in 1997 were 10 percent above the 1990 level and the energy agency has forecast that by 2010 they will be 33 percent above the 1990 level unless measures are imposed to reduce them. But even as the United States and some other countries continue to burn more fossil fuels and to emit more carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, Russia and its neighbors are burning and emitting less than previously forecast, the agency said today. Under the treaty, countries that give off more greenhouse gases than the treaty allows may buy surplus reductions from countries that give off less than their targets. The energy agency said the continuing depression in Russia and other former Soviet states was holding down energy use and would probably produce a huge bubble of emissions credits by the time the treaty is supposed to come into force, between 2008 and 2012. The expected emissions of carbon dioxide in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in the year 2010 are likely to be 13 percent lower than predicted last year, the new forecast said. These countries will have at least 374 million metric tons worth of carbon credits available to sell to other countries, it said. Last year, the agency forecast that these countries would have only 196 million metric tons of carbon credits. (Under the treaty, emissions of all greenhouse gases are tallied in units of carbon, one of the elements released when fossil fuels are burned.)For countries like the United States whose emissions are growing far beyond the limits set by the treaty, the change is significant. To meet the targets of the Kyoto Protocol, industrialized countries would need to eliminate about 822 million metric tons of carbon from their anticipated emissions.''If the industrialized nations that have agreed to carbon emissions caps can purchase these credits, this level of trading alone would allow their carbon emission levels to rise by an average of 7 percent over 1990 levels, and still meet the Protocol's average emissions target of 7 percent below 1990 levels,'' the energy agency said. Worldwide, the agency said, carbon emissions are expected to be 39 percent greater in 2010 than they were in 1990. While that is 4 percent less than the agency predicted last year, it suggests that the world as a whole is doing far less than needed to head off the risks of global warming.

President Clinton sent environmental groups a letter today that aggressively defends Vice President Al Gore's record on their issues -- a highly unusual move that underscores the President's commitment to promoting Mr. Gore's Presidential prospects. Mr. Clinton was responding to a letter to Mr. Gore earlier this week from several environmental groups who accused the President and Vice President of breaking their pledge to reduce pollutants that cause global warming. White House aides said they could not recall a similar instance in which Mr. Clinton felt so moved to publicly aid Mr. Gore.''No one has done more over the past decade to mobilize action against climate change than Vice President Gore,'' Mr. Clinton wrote in his three-page letter. ''And no one can more effectively lead this effort in the decade ahead. We must not allow our frustration over the real obstacles we face to distract us from our common goals.''He continued, ''We must pursue sound strategies, not proposals that risk eroding the support so vital to our success.''Mr. Clinton's effort demonstrates the degree to which he is determined to help his Vice President by trying to smooth relations with environmental groups on what could be an important issue in the Presidential campaign. The timing of Mr. Clinton's letter is particularly helpful. Next Thursday is Earth Day, when the Administration is bound to draw significant attention to its environmental record. The environmental groups' letter to Mr. Gore, who has long cast himself as an environmental champion, was surprisingly combative. ''We are writing,'' it complained, ''to voice deep disappointment with the lack of an Administration proposal to require significant reductions in global warming pollution. We are particularly frustrated that the Administration has not sought meaningful emission reductions from either power plants or passenger vehicles.''In his reply, Mr. Clinton recited the Administration's environmental accomplishments in the face of ''the most anti-environmental Congress ever.'' Throughout the letter, he lauded Mr. Gore's ''vision and leadership.'' He said Mr. Gore had ''led the charge'' on a number of fronts. He also wrote, ''The Vice President and I have sought at every opportunity to highlight the mounting scientific evidence that global warming is a threat to this and future generations.''A treaty intended to reduce global emissions was negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997 and signed by the Administration last year. But it was not presented to the Senate for ratification because it faced strong opposition from industry groups. Carl Pope, executive director of the Sierra Club, one of nine groups that signed the original letter, said of the response, ''It is a valid defense of what the Administration has done to date. The letter is fundamentally silent on the question of when the Administration will take the next step: insisting that the auto industry and the public utilities start cleaning up their greenhouse emissions.''Paul Hansen, executive director of the Izaak Walton League of America,  another signer of the environmental groups' letter, said, ''The President makes a good point -- that we need to try to work together.'' Even so, he said, it does not take away from the deficiencies in the Administration's record. Another signer of the letter, Philip E. Clapp, president of the National Environmental Trust, said Mr. Clinton ''feels it necessary to cast his and the Vice President's inaction in the best political light.'' He added: ''This is calculated to defend the Vice President from potential criticism between now and the election.''Mr. Hansen said he was disturbed that a colleague had given the environmental groups' letter to reporters. ''I'm extremely unhappy about that,'' he said. ''We thought this was an exchange of views -- not a political stone-throwing contest.'' But Mr. Clapp insisted that ''this letter was quite specifically a public letter.''

When Bill Clinton became the first Democrat in a dozen years to move into the White House, the party's cognoscenti saw the treatment of Stuart E. Eizenstat as a sign of the young Administration's disdain for the political skills of the old crowd of former top aides to Jimmy Carter. Mr. Eizenstat, who had been President Carter's chief policy maker for his domestic agenda and then spent the Reagan and Bush years on the sidelines at a large law firm, was sent by President Clinton to Brussels, where he had the relatively obscure post of ambassador to the European Union. Slowly, Mr. Eizenstat demonstrated to the President that he could be trusted to handle sensitive assignments, and after tackling many of the most difficult trade issues as a high-ranking official at both the State Department and Commerce Department, it was hardly surprising that Mr. Clinton would turn to him today to become the next Deputy Treasury Secretary, one of the most important economic policy jobs in Washington. Mr. Eizenstat was praised by aides and friends for having a mind for the mind-numbing minutiae of trade policy but who can also see the bigger picture. His assignments from Mr. Clinton have included negotiating with the Swiss Government and banks over reparations for Holocaust victims, dealing with the Europeans over threatened trade sanctions for foreign companies doing business with Cuba, leading the American delegation to the global warming conference in Kyoto, Japan, and resolving a difficult shipping dispute with Japan.''Stu has handled many of our nation's most difficult missions over the last six years, from our successful efforts to lift food and medicine sanctions on trading partners -- or nontrading partners -- to the struggle for justice in compensation on behalf of the victims of the Holocaust, an endeavor he will continue,'' President Clinton said today in a ceremony in the Rose Garden. ''With his legendary grasp of policy and the art of practical government, his long experience, his stamina and his steady judgment, he will be a vital, full member of our economic team.''Stuart Elliott Eizenstat was born in Chicago on Jan. 15, 1943. After graduating from the University of North Carolina and Harvard Law School, he landed a job as a junior aide to President Lyndon Johnson in 1967 and worked the next year as research director for the unsuccessful presidential campaign of Hubert H. Humphrey. Before joining the Carter Administration, he became a partner in the Washington office of Powell, Goldstein, Frazer & Murphy, a large Atlanta law firm, and his clients included several large American and foreign companies with trade issues pending in Washington. Away from work, Mr. Eizenstat is known for dedication to religion and religious causes. A practicing Jew who leaves his office early enough on Fridays to observe the Sabbath, he once had President Carter to his home for a Passover seder. He also took his own china to Belgium and raised tens of thousands of dollars in private donations to refurbish the kitchen of the American Embassy in Brussels to make it kosher. One question that emerges from today's appointment will be how Mr. Eizenstat, who had his share of turf fights during both the Carter and Clinton Administrations, will get along with Lawrence H. Summers, who was nominated as the next Treasury Secretary. Explaining Mr. Eizenstat's success both in government and in private practice, Simon Lazarus 3d, a close friend and former law partner, said, ''He is relentless in trying to prevail.''''He is so determined that he finds it physically painful to lose,'' Mr. Lazarus said. Mr. Summers is known to be similarly strong-willed, leading some officials to wonder today how the two men would work together. A NEW ECONOMIC TEAM: THE TRUSTED DEPUTY

The proposition is simple enough: Public dollars pay for a lot of scientific research, so data from that research should be available to the public. At the request of Senator Richard C. Shelby, Republican of Alabama, a measure saying just that passed quietly one evening last October, without hearings or debate, as a one-sentence amendment to the 4,000-plus-page appropriations bill. Under the amendment, anyone can write a request to the Government under the Freedom of Information Act and get ''all data produced'' by a published study paid for with any public dollars, and potentially receive everything from a summary of findings to a scientist's notebooks or E-mail or, in some cases, information about patients.''Experience has shown that transparency in government is a principle that has improved decision-making and increased the public's trust in government,'' Mr. Shelby stated in explaining the law's premise. For too long, he said, Americans ''have been unable to access federally funded research data despite the significant impact of this data in the policy-making process.''The law has the United States Chamber of Commerce delighted. ''In the regulatory reform arena there may never be a more important issue,'' its Web site reads. It says that companies would be better able to scrutinize the data that policy makers use when they issue regulations, and it adds, ''This would be the first time the business community has ever been provided with the basis for the bureaucracy imposing $700 billion in annual regulatory costs on us.''The conclusion: ''If implemented properly, this rule will do more for regulatory reform than all the legislation passed in the last 10 years!''But scientists and university administrators, who took some time to notice the law, are alarmed. They fear that corporate or political interests will use the law to hamper research on controversial subjects, tie up scientists in red tape, circumvent confidentiality agreements and thwart Government regulations. While they agree with the general notion of giving the public access to research data, they assert that data from any study, no matter how rigorous, can be made to appear questionable if examined by hostile experts and publicists.''We have now concluded that the legislation constitutes a broad political attack on both science and on the Federal regulatory apparatus,'' Nils Hasselmo, president of the Association of American Universities, said in a letter to Vice President Al Gore on Wednesday. He added that ''we are very concerned that such an effort could involve actions designed to discredit scientists and discourage researchers from addressing controversial topics.''At a hearing about the law before a House subcommittee on government management and technology earlier this month, scientists recalled previous clashes between science and industry and said they feared that the law would increase such cases. In one example, Dr. Paul Fisher at the Medical College of Georgia published a study in 1991 of what small children know about tobacco brands. He found that Joe Camel was a figure known just as well as Mickey Mouse by 6-year-olds, and that they knew the brands of cigarettes in some detail. The cigarette maker R.J. Reynolds decided it wanted to see Dr. Fisher's data and do its own analysis. The company wanted not only all the raw data, but also the names and addresses of the children who were interviewed so the company could go back to ''re-interview'' them. Dr. Fisher fought the case in court, but ultimately the college's own president agreed that the company should have access to the data. Dr. Fisher resigned from the college, and Reynolds got most of the data it wanted, although it did not contact the children. The litigation dragged on for years and made Dr. Fisher decide not to do research on tobacco issues ever again. Supporters of the law dismiss the possibility of harassment. But critics point out that Senator Shelby started work on the amendment after Harvard researchers, citing confidential patient information, declined to give Congress their raw data in a two-decade-long pollution study. The study, sponsored by the Environmental Protection Agency, was instrumental in creating a 1997 Federal regulation that required stronger controls on sources of small particle emissions, including cars and power plants. Among the companies that opposed the regulation was the Alabama Power and Light Company. Ultimately, Harvard compromised by giving the data to a bipartisan group, funded by both the E.P.A. and the auto industry, which is auditing the data and conclusions. After that episode, Senator Shelby recommended that businesses be able to get the raw data themselves for analysis and re-interpretation.''I strongly believe that federally funded research data that is used to drive public policy should be available to the taxpayers who paid for it,'' he said in a statement today. But Kevin Casey, who as senior director of Federal and state relations at Harvard University was involved in the dispute over the pollution study, called the Shelby amendment a backdoor attack on regulations like the emissions rule.''This is not about getting the public information,'' he said. ''It is about attacking regulations on pollution and other areas.''Through the new rule, Mr. Casey asserts, Republicans are able to attack environmental laws under the guise of sunshine laws and not lose public support, as they have for their more open challenges in recent years.''The Shelby amendment is a backdoor way to achieve the same goal,'' Mr. Casey said. ''It allows company lawyers to harass scientists collecting data on the most sensitive and controversial issues -- such as environmental health and pollution -- to slow down the research used to make policy.''The real impact of the amendment will not be known until it goes into effect later this year; it is now being formulated into regulations by the Office of Management and Budget. Among the questions facing the office is how to define ''data'' -- does it mean blood samples and archeological finds as well as written work? Under a draft of the regulations, those who want data must ask for it under the Freedom of Information Act, by submitting a request to the agency that gave the grant to the scientist. The scientist then would turn over all data -- including names and addresses of patients and other private and commercially secret information -- to the agency. Then, the F.O.I.A. office of that funding agency would determine what must be given to the requester and what must be withheld. The information act carries protections against giving out some kinds of information, including commercial trade secrets or financial data, and private information such as medical records. Administrators at the National Institutes of Health, the agency that finances the largest percentage of biomedical research, said they were  concerned about the cost of collecting and storing all the raw data. As it is, in the fiscal year 1998, the institutes' F.O.I.A. office had 20 full-time employees answering 1,200 requests at a cost of $500,000. And despite the legal protections, administrators say they worry, too, about the confidentiality of patient records.''Even if they redact the name and address, there are other ways to identify the patients -- if it was a female patient at a certain hospital with a particular diagnosis, that might be enough to identify them,'' said Wendy Baldwin, the institutes' deputy director for extramural affairs. Members of Mr. Shelby's staff said that while they understood the scientists' worries, they believed that the F.O.I.A. rules would prevent disclosure of private or trade secret information. And, if problems do occur,  ''we can address those. We will be alert to those.''In most areas of science, the way to test the mettle of a study is not to examine data, but to do another study, said Carol Scheman, vice president for governmental affairs at the University of Pennsylvania, but for some kinds of studies, she said, ''Senator Shelby is right. There are real issues of how to share data.''For example, in the pollution studies by Harvard's School of Public health, thousands of subjects were followed for more than two decades. That kind of work is unlikely to be copied. So some other method must be used to review the data behind the scientists' final conclusions, she said. Industry is not uniformly in favor of the new rule. Pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, for example, fear that the rule will jeopardize university-industry agreements. If a scientist's data can be fetched through F.O.I.A., so can information they have shared with the scientist. This means, potentially, that competitors could learn much about the progress of their commercial work through the new rule. The Washington watchdog group OMB Watch also points out that the rule is aimed at nonprofit groups while leaving the corporations who work with government funds untouched. The amendment applies to hospitals and other nonprofit groups that get grants from the government, but excludes other groups that get contracts from the Government. ''Thus, it applies to a Y.M.C.A. that receives a Federal grant, but not to Boeing that is doing a range of research through contracts,'' Gary D. Bass, a spokesman for the group, said in a July 15 statement. But other business and advocacy groups are enthusiastic. Those on the record in favor of the Shelby amendment include Gun Owners of America, which has complained about research that shows guns in the home are several times more likely to kill family members by accident than intruders on purpose. In Washington, several dedicated anti-regulatory groups have lined up in favor of the Shelby rule, including the Competitive Enterprise Institute and Citizens for a Sound Economy. In its Web site, the Chamber of Commerce, notes that huge masses of data can be fetched from scientists -- data to challenge E.P.A. regulations on clean air and water, data supporting the global warming agreement called the Kyoto Protocol. ''This list is virtually limitless and can be extended into areas other than health and safety,'' it says.

As the hot sun sets on this long, odd summer, you might try staring into the nighttime sky. Several times in the last few months, observers in the lower 48 have seen ''noctilucent clouds,'' which develop about 50 miles above the earth's surface -- clouds so high that they reflect the sun's rays long after nightfall. They're spectacular -- and they're also out of place. These odd clouds belong in far northern and southern latitudes, but global warming seems to be driving them toward the Equator. The same carbon dioxide that warms the lower atmosphere cools the next layer -- the mesosphere -- causing the clouds to form. Sightings as far south as Colorado are a big event, according to Gary Thomas, a professor at the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. ''While they are a beautiful phenomenon,'' Professor Thomas told National Geographic's on-line magazine, ''these clouds may be a message from Mother Nature that we are upsetting the equilibrium of the atmosphere.''Ten years ago, global warming was a strong hypothesis. Now, after a decade of intensive research, scientists around the world have formed an ironclad consensus that we are heating the planet. Almost daily some new piece of evidence appears; the weekly editions of the journals Science and Nature make ''The Blair Witch Project'' look like ''The Baby-Sitters Club.'' Forget the piddling drought and heat wave that withered lawns and fields across the Northeast this summer. Consider the real news:Spring comes a week earlier across the Northern Hemisphere than it did just 30 years ago. Severe rainstorms have grown by almost 20 percent, precisely what you'd expect on a planet where warmer air can carry more water vapor. A Navy sonar survey conducted this summer shows that the Arctic ice sheet is in many places 40 inches thinner than its normal 10 feet. Warmer waters have bleached coral reefs around the globe. Glaciers are melting. Sea levels are rising. The question is not what we should do. Though it's far too late to prevent global warming, it takes no special insight to deduce the policies that would slow it down. Stiff increases in the price of fossil fuels would quickly bring a new generation of renewable energy technologies to the fore. Raising fuel-economy standards for cars and trucks would end the trend to ever-bigger sport utility vehicles. And focused diplomacy and foreign aid could keep developing nations from sliding into our bad habits. No, the question is why we've done so little. In 1992, President George Bush promised the world that the United States would emit no more carbon dioxide in 2000 than it had in 1990. The Clinton Administration instead watched with little apparent concern as our emissions surged more than 10 percent. Congress refuses even to consider the baby step represented by the 1997 Kyoto accords, which would return us to 1990 levels by 2010. The issue barely even crops up in the Presidential campaigns. The reason, I think, is that we don't yet feel viscerally the wrongness of what we're doing -- not just the very rational fears about what it will be like to live in a superheated world but, even more, the simple shock that we've grown so large we can dominate everything. Earthquakes and volcanoes are the only ''natural disasters'' left. Everything that happens above the surface comes at least in part from us, from our appetites and our economies. I used to wonder why my parents' generation had been so blind to the wrongness of segregation; they were people of good conscience, so why had inertia ruled for so long? Now I think I understand better. It took the emotional shock of seeing police dogs rip the flesh of protesters for white people to really understand the day-to-day corrosiveness of Jim Crow. We need that same gut understanding of our environmental situation if we are to take the giant steps we must take soon. Go outside: try to understand that the sun beating down, the rain pouring down, the wind blowing by are all now human artifacts. We don't live on the planet we were born on. We live on a new, poorer, simpler planet, and we continue to impoverish it with every ounce of oil and pound of coal that we burn. In retrospect it will be clear. A hundred years from now, people may well remember the 1990's not as the decade of the Internet's spread or the Dow's ascension but as the years when global temperatures began spiking upward -- as the years when rain and wind and ice and sea water began irrefutably to reflect the power and heedlessness of our species. But how bad it will get depends on how deeply and how quickly we can feel. It depends on whether we're still capable of shock. Bill McKibben is the author of ''The End of Nature,'' which will be reissued this month in an updated 10th-anniversary edition.

Negotiating the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996 was a triumph for American diplomacy. Its provisions, which prohibit all atmospheric and underground nuclear tests, would lock in the United States' current technological lead, prevent China from testing advanced new weapons designs and block non-nuclear countries that have signed the treaty from conducting future nuclear tests. It would also put increased pressure on countries that have not yet signed, like India and Pakistan, to avoid further testing and to accept the treaty. The 152 countries that have signed the treaty are all abiding by its terms. But the agreement becomes legally binding only when ratified by a list of 44 countries, including all current nuclear powers. Only 21 of these countries have ratified so far. Perversely, the United States, which has the most to gain from the treaty achieving legal force, is among the holdouts. That is because Senate Republicans have held ratification hostage to their own competing agenda of missile defense. No defensive system yet exists that can reliably protect the United States against incoming missile attack. The Clinton Administration has agreed to spend $4 billion over the next six years on research and testing for a limited missile defense system and has set aside a further $6.6 billion for possible construction. It is also negotiating with Russia on changes in the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty to permit expanded missile defenses. But that has not been enough for the Republicans, especially the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Jesse Helms. He wants his committee to delay taking up the test ban treaty until the Administration submits two other agreements that the Administration does not yet have the votes to pass -- an earlier set of amendments to the 1972 ABM treaty and the completely unrelated Kyoto treaty on global warming. That timetable would further needlessly delay the test ban treaty and could even risk unraveling it as other countries lose patience with the Senate's stalling. The test ban treaty, endorsed by America's top military commander and the directors of the nation's nuclear weapons laboratories, should be ratified promptly on its own merits. The Republican leadership needs to show greater responsibility on this issue. Senator Trent Lott, the majority leader, should insist that Mr. Helms put ratification on the Foreign Relations Committee's calendar early this month. That would give the full Senate a chance to act in time for the United States to take part in an important review conference scheduled for October. A successful conference would encourage India and Pakistan to join the treaty. Russia and China, the other nuclear powers that have not yet ratified, are more likely to do so once Washington does. Ratifying the test ban treaty would reduce nuclear dangers around the world. Senator Helms and his fellow Republicans should stop holding it up.

Vice President Al Gore, who prides himself for his environmental record, was stung last month when an environmental group, Friends of the Earth, endorsed former Senator Bill Bradley, his rival for the Democratic Presidential nomination. Yesterday some of Mr. Gore's supporters struck back, holding a fund-raising lunch in midtown Manhattan that featured endorsements from some leading New York environmentalists, including Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and Lawrence Rockefeller.''He's our last best chance to save the planet,'' said Mr. Kennedy, the oldest son of former Senator Robert F. Kennedy and an environmental lawyer, as he urged his audience to focus full time on the election.''Put down your litigation,'' he told the roughly 100 environmental leaders, many of them lawyers, who gave $1,000 each to Mr. Gore. ''Put down your lobbying. Forget about Albany. Forget about anything else you're doing.''Mr. Rockefeller, the nephew of former Gov. Nelson Rockefeller and also an environmental lawyer -- and a Republican -- said he was crossing party lines to support Mr. Gore.''I'm going to put party labels aside and put our kids' future first and the earth's future,'' he said, calling Mr. Gore ''an environmental champion.''Both said that Mr. Gore, author of ''Earth in the Balance,'' had led the fight to protect air and water quality and to clean up toxic waste sites. They also lauded him for his efforts to combat global warming and increase the fuel efficiency of cars without increasing the costs, and for his ''livability agenda'' to reduce traffic jams and preserve open space. Mr. Kennedy said later that yesterday's event was held in part to counter the Friends of the Earth's endorsement of Mr. Bradley, who the group said was more effective in pushing environmental matters.''That was among the events that brought us together,'' Mr. Kennedy said, citing these others: ''Gore's getting a raw deal in the press, that George W.'s getting a free ride and sometimes your friends have to stand up when there's a lot of momentum against you.''The reference was to polls showing that Mr. Bradley is running even, if not ahead, of the Vice President in crucial states like New York and New Hampshire and that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican front-runner, maintains a solid lead over both nationally. But instead of comparing Mr. Gore's record with that of Mr. Bradley, the Gore supporters -- and Mr. Gore himself -- compared it with that of Mr. Bush, whose state is home to a quarter of the nation's oil refineries and two-thirds of its chemical industries. Mr. Gore said that Houston was overtaking Los Angeles as the city with the worst smog in America.  ''Under Governor Bush, Texas has ranked No. 1 in America for carcinogens in the air, No. 1 in America for toxic releases into the air, into the water and into the soil,'' he said. He said Mr. Bush had received financial backing from polluters who opposed environmental regulations.''That kind of approach cannot be taken into the White House,'' Mr. Gore said, describing Mr. Bush as ''a person who carries water -- dirty water -- for the chemical industry.'' As applause erupted, Mr. Gore said: ''I'm going to tell it like it is!''Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, defended his environmental record. Under Governor Bush, Mr. McClellan said, Texas has planned to reduce air emissions by 250,000 tons annually, the equivalent of removing 5.5 million cars from the road. He also said that Mr. Gore, whom President George Bush once labeled ''ozone man,'' had ''a long history of weird and extreme environmental ideas,'' including his support for the Kyoto global-warming treaty. Still, the Vice President seemed to have Mr. Bradley on his mind as he uttered some thoughts throughout his environmental speech about ''authenticity.'' Bradley supporters frequently cite that quality as a strength in comparison with Mr. Gore, who is often criticized as overcalculating and cautious. Mr. Gore said that everyone had an ''obligation to be authentic and to integrate all the different parts of our lives into a coherent and authentic expression of who we are and what's most important in our lives.''He said he had worked on environmental issues for a long time, but then referred without elaboration to a challenge in his personal life that forced him to think about environmental policy anew. His remarks seemed to reflect his current struggle to try to reveal more about himself in his campaign stump speech, which he did not deliver today.''Just as in our personal lives when we find out how to be authentic and speak from the heart, it turns out to be easier than any other way of being,'' Mr. Gore said.--------------------Teachers' Unit Endorses GoreThe political committee of the nation's largest labor union, the National Education Association, endorsed Mr. Gore yesterday to be the Democratic nominee for President -- with the expectation that the association's executive board would issue the official endorsement of him today. The move by the union, which has 2.5 million members, comes after the nation's other large teachers' union, the million-member American Federation of Teachers, endorsed Mr. Gore on Tuesday. The National Education Association is not part of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which will debate at its convention next week whether to endorse Mr. Gore. But an endorsement by the education association, because of its membership and the size of its political action fund, is expected to be a major boost for Mr. Gore.

MIDDLE EASTISRAEL: EX-TERRORIST TO MOVE -- At Yasir Arafat's request, Prime Minister Ehud Barak is permitting the former terrorist leader of a militant Palestinian political faction to move from Damascus to the Palestinian-governed Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Nayef Hawatmeh, 63, left, who as head of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine was held responsible for the killing of 24 Israeli schoolchildren in 1974, says he has renounced violence and wants to take part in politics in the Palestinian Authority. William A. Orme Jr. (NYT)TUNISIA: PRESIDENT RE-ELECTED -- In a result that was never in doubt, President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali won a third five-year term with nearly 100 percent of the vote, official results showed. Mr. Ben Ali, 62, won 3,269,000 out of 3,287,000 votes cast, Interior Minister Ali Chaouch said. For the first time, two token opposition candidates took part. They got a combined total of just over one half of 1 percent of the votes cast.(Reuters) IRAQ: U.S. JETS ATTACK -- American jets patrolling the no-flight zone over northern Iraq bombed an Iraqi missile storage center south of Mosul in response to Iraqi antiaircraft fire, the United States military said. According to an Iraqi spokesman, two people were killed and seven were wounded.(AP, Agence France-Pressse) EUROPENORTHERN IRELAND: RENEWED OPTIMISM -- Intensified talks in Belfast to break the impasse that has blocked progress in putting the peace accord into place produced guarded expressions of hope for a breakthrough this week when former Senator George J. Mitchell returns to finish his formal review. An Ulster Unionist negotiator, Alan McFarland, said, ''There is a degree of trust creeping in'' between his party and Sinn Fein, the political wing of the I.R.A.Warren Hoge (NYT)SPAIN: KEY BASQUE DETAINED -- The French police arrested Belen Gonzalez Penalva, whom authorities say represented the Basque separatist group E.T.A. at the only peace talks, held last May, with the Spanish Government since they declared a cease-fire 13 months ago. Her arrest came a day after the rebels announced tougher demands for resuming the stalled peace talks, insisting that Madrid must first agree to Basque self-determination and the withdrawal of all state security forces from the region. The Government dismissed the initiative as propaganda. Al Goodman (NYT)GERMANY: 'GREENHOUSE' MEETING -- Representatives from 168 countries opened a two-week conference in Bonn intended to cut emissions of so-called greenhouse gases blamed for global warming. They will discuss a timetable for carrying out the agreement reached at the 1997 United Nations conference in Kyoto, Japan, which set global standards for reducing pollution, including a cut in greenhouse emissions by 5.2 percent for industrialized nations from 1990 levels by 2008-2012. Victor Homola (NYT)BOSNIA: SUSPECT SEIZED -- NATO-led peacekeeping troops in Bosnia detained a suspected Bosnian Serb war criminal, Damir Dosen, who is under indictment for crimes against humanity. A NATO statement issued in Brussels said Mr. Dosen would be transferred to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia at The Hague. It said he was shift commander in 1992 at a camp outside Prijedor, where detainees were ''killed, sexually assaulted, tortured, beaten and otherwise subjected to cruel and inhuman treatment.''( Reuters) AFRICASOUTH AFRICA: NOT GUILTY PLEA -- Dr. Walter Basson, the head of chemical warfare under the apartheid-era Government, pleaded not guilty to 61 criminal charges, including conspiracy to murder, fraud and drug dealing. Six murder charges against him have already been dismissed because those killings took place outside South Africa. Dr. Basson still faces 16 counts of murder and his trial is expected to last two years. Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)THE AMERICASMEXICO: TOP REBEL SEIZED -- The recently-formed federal police said it captured the top commander of a guerrilla group operating in the violence-torn state of Guerrero. Jacobo Silva Nogales, known as Commander Antonio, was arrested in the state capital, Chilpancingo, along with three other people accused of leading the Revolutionary Army of the Insurgent People. The year-old group has carried out a string of armed attacks on Government troops. Julia Preston (NYT)VENEZUELA: CONTENTIOUS CLAUSE -- The assembly drawing up a new constitution expected to significantly expand the powers of President Hugo Chavez has approved a clause that would require all news organizations to publish only ''truthful and impartial'' information and guarantee anyone mentioned in a news report the right to a rebuttal. Critics in Venezuela and abroad have condemned the measure, saying it would give Mr. Chavez and his followers the power to silence opponents and could lead to censorship. Larry Rohter (NYT)ASIAHONG KONG: IMMIGRATION REVISITED -- Five months after it was reversed by Beijing on a landmark immigration ruling, the highest court in Hong Kong began hearing an appeal by 17 mainland Chinese who claim they have the right to live in the territory. The mainland Chinese claim their right under a January ruling by the court. That ruling was overturned by Beijing, and legal experts said the court will have to rule on the validity of that action in deciding on those claims. Mark Landler (NYT)INDIA: PARLIAMENT OPENED -- President K. R. Narayanan opened Parliament with a pledge that ''bold strategy'' would be used in economic reforms, pledging the creation of 10 million jobs each year. Among a broad outline of policies, he mentioned speedier disinvestment of state-owned companies, improved infrastructure and banking reforms. Barry Bearak (NYT)

Even as the world's expanding population and economy increase atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide that scientists say are warming the earth, the global energy system is moving steadily away from the carbon-rich fuels whose combustion produces the gas. Experts say atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide may be double that of the pre-industrial era by the end of the next century. But they also say the levels would be much higher except for a trend toward lower-carbon fuels that has been going on for more than 100 years, but has been largely unnoticed except by a small band of energy specialists. The question now, they say, is whether the trend can be accelerated enough to stave off or lessen what many scientists believe is a potentially disruptive global warming. For nearly a century and a half, fuels with high amounts of carbon have progressively been replaced by those containing less. First wood, which is high in carbon, was eclipsed in the late 19th century by coal, which contains less. Then oil, with a lower carbon content still, dethroned King Coal in the 1960's. Now analysts say that natural gas, lighter still in carbon, may be entering its heyday, and that the day of hydrogen -- providing a fuel with no carbon at all, by definition -- may at last be about to dawn. As a result, the experts estimate, the world's economy today burns less than two-thirds as much carbon per unit of energy produced as it did in 1860. In the United States, they estimate, the trend toward lower-carbon fuels combined with greater energy efficiency has, since 1950, reduced by about half the amount of carbon spewed out for each unit of economic production. But because economic growth and population growth have been so rapid over the decades, overall atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide have steadily risen, to the point  that the concentrations may well have doubled by the year 2100. Mainstream scientists say that this much carbon dioxide could warm the earth, on average, by 3 to 5 degrees Fahrenheit. By comparison, that is about half as much as it has warmed since the depths of the last ice age 18,000 to 20,000 years ago. A change of this magnitude would likely have widespread consequences for the world's climate, weather and human life. Now, as representatives of 150 governments meet in Bonn in the latest round of global talks on measures to further reduce carbon-dioxide emissions, analysts both in and out of industry say that the next quarter-century is shaping up as a period of technological and economic ferment offering a chance to accelerate the trend toward a low-carbon economy and, eventually, a no-carbon one. In Bonn, the delegates are trying to work out the details of an agreement forged two years ago in Kyoto, Japan, that could speed up the trend.  Their work is not expected to be finished for at least a year, and the Kyoto agreement still must be ratified by a sufficient number of countries after that. However that may turn out, ''the decarbonization of the energy system is the single most important fact to emerge from the last 20 years of analysis'' of the system, said Dr. Jesse H. Ausubel, an expert on energy and climate at Rockefeller University in New York City. Dr. Ausubel predicts that this evolution will produce a carbon-free energy system by the end of the 21st century. Among some recent signs of the trend are these:*The Federal Energy Information Administration reported last week that emissions of carbon dioxide by the United States had increased by an average of 1.37 percent a year in the 1990's -- only about half the 2.6-percent rate of growth in economic production. Analysts say the discrepancy is evidence that the economy is being decoupled from carbon.*The agency reported this month that the same is generally true in China, the biggest consumer and producer of coal in the world, where coal production has been reported to be dropping lately. ''China has dispelled a commonly held notion that economic growth and energy consumption are necessarily coupled,'' the report said.*In December, Honda will introduce in the United States a high-efficiency, low-emissions automobile powered partly by gasoline and partly by self-generated electricity. It is said to run at 60 miles per gallon of gasoline in town, and 71 on the highway, and to travel 600 to 700 miles on a tank of gas. Toyota has introduced a similar ''hybrid'' automobile in Japan, and these cars are ''literally kick-the-tires examples of the decarbonized economy,'' said Hal Harvey, president of the Energy Foundation, a partnership of foundations that promotes energy efficiency and renewable energy. Other auto makers are also planning hybrids, which are being viewed as a transition, ultimately, to vehicles powered by hydrogen fuel cells that emit no carbon. In its planning, the General Motors Corporation has ''embraced fuel cells as the technology of choice,'' but with hybrids coming first, said John Williams, the leader of the company's internal team on global climate issues. And while auto companies are looking down that track, some of the world's biggest energy companies are looking to provide the appropriate fuels. Hydrogen, in particular, has attracted fresh interest. Until recently, ''the hydrogen option was seen as rather distant,'' said Ged R. Davis, an executive of Shell International in London who analyzes such questions for Royal Dutch/Shell, one of the world's largest energy companies. ''Now it is looking closer, perhaps over the next decade or two,'' Mr. Davis added.  ''Most of the energy and car companies are looking at this rather seriously.'' Shell itself has established a hydrogen subsidiary. In the nearer term, hydrogen would be used in fuel cells for cars, trucks and industrial plants, just as it already provides power for orbiting spacecraft. But ultimately, hydrogen could also provide a general carbon-free fuel. The world energy system will not change overnight, of course, if it changes at all. And new products must ultimately stand the test of the marketplace. But some analysts say that the next two decades or so will be a time of unusual pressure for change, both for environmental and economic reasons, in which companies will be driven to compete for survival and dominance in some sort of emerging new energy system. Whether companies are seriously pursuing new options or merely preserving them for the future, experts say there seems little doubt that the long-term trend toward decarbonization is real, and that it will most likely continue even in the absence of any shift to hydrogen or renewable energy sources like wind and solar power.''The future decarbonization rate is likely to be at least as high as the historical one'' of about three-tenths of a percent a year, said Dr. Nebojsa Nakicenovic, an expert on energy and the environment with the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, a research group in Laxenburg, Austria. The institute was one of the first groups to study the question. Oil accounts for the biggest share of global energy consumption today, followed by coal and, closely, by natural gas. In most of the world except the United States and China, said Dr. Ausubel of Rockefeller University, coal is either defunct or on the way out, and natural gas will increasingly displace it. According to several recent analyses, Dr. Nakicenovic said, recoverable natural gas now appears far more abundant than had been previously thought. The burning of gas produces, on average, only about a third of the carbon dioxide per unit of energy of coal, and about two-thirds that of oil. Gas not only can fuel fixed facilities like industrial plants and furnaces, it can also be processed to produce hydrogen for use in carbon-free fuel cells to power automobiles and generate electricity. In those cells, there is no combustion; instead, hydrogen reacts chemically with oxygen to produce electricity.  But when hydrogen is extracted from gas, the residual carbon must somehow be disposed of, possibly by pumping it back into depleted oil and gas wells. Dr. Ausubel predicts that natural gas will become the dominant fuel of the next 40 to 50 years. If so, that alone would be enough to continue the long-term decarbonization trend. China, which some experts think  will emerge as the biggest carbon-dioxide emitter of the 21st century, has greatly reduced its energy consumption per unit of economic output, has closed several coal mines, is seeking to modernize industrial and power plants and is moving toward natural gas, many analysts say. Not least, they say, the Chinese are worried about the health effects of coal's air pollution. Nevertheless, the Energy Information Administration reported last week, China's coal demand is expected to double by 2020. So while the trend toward a carbon-free economy may continue, Dr. Ausubel says, it might not move rapidly enough to assuage the fears of those who are most concerned about global warming. He says that if the trend continues to evolve more or less naturally, with business as usual, it will take another century or so to decarbonize the energy system fully. By then, he predicts, atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide will be around 500 parts per million, nearly double what they were before the industrial revolution. Mainstream scientists say that would be enough to change the earth's climate substantially, make droughts, heat waves and floods worse and raise the sea level to heights that would threaten many low-lying coastal areas and islands. Some analysts say that 500 parts per million is a best-case estimate, and that business-as-usual could cause a tripling of pre-industrial carbon-dioxide levels. Other experts think that concentrations could be held substantially below 500 parts per million if the trend toward decarbonization were to accelerate. Mr. Harvey of the Energy Foundation says ''prospects are excellent'' for an acceleration. And Mr. Davis, the Shell executive, says his company's analyses suggest that if the proper incentives were in place, new energy technologies could be adopted broadly enough to bring about a peak in oil use and carbon-dioxide emissions by about 2020. After that, there would be a decline. One sort of incentive might lie in the Kyoto agreement, which calls for a group of 39 industrialized countries to reduce their carbon dioxide emissions by an average of 5 percent below 1990 levels over the period 2008 to 2012. One mechanism for doing this is a system whereby a country that exceeds its reductions target can earn money by selling that extra reduction to another country that is having trouble meeting its target. A similar system, involving company-to-company trading, has been proposed for the United States. While negotiators struggle over the terms of such arrangements and politicians wrangle over putting the Kyoto accord into effect, many energy analysts seem to agree on one thing: The ultimate goal ought to be a carbon-free economy based largely on hydrogen. Dr. Ausubel, for one, predicts that such an economy will materialize. Many would agree with Mr. Williams of General Motors: ''I think I'm on pretty solid ground in saying the long-term vision is hydrogen. But there's a lot of work between here and there.''

THE AMERICASCANADA: NEW CHIEF JUSTICE  Prime Minister Jean Chretien named Beverley McLachlin chief justice of the Supreme Court. She is the first woman to hold the position. Ms. McLachlin, who has served on the court for a decade, has been called an egalitarian jurist and a radical feminist. In a September decision, Ms. McLachlin wrote that an aerobics test that led to the firing of a woman as a firefighter was discriminatory. In a July decision she barred a boy from suing his mother for prenatal injuries. The conservative Canada Family Action Coalition, denounced the appointment. James Brooke (NYT)MEXICO: FINAL POLLS FAVOR LABASTIDA  Final opinion polls before the governing party's presidential primary on Sunday showed Francisco Labastida Ochoa, a former interior minister who is the candidate of the party establishment, leading Roberto Madrazo Pintado, a maverick former governor running as a rebel. In personal interviews with the Reforma newspaper, 34 percent of 2,540 registered voters in all 32 states supported Mr. Labastida and 28 percent backed Mr. Madrazo. The margin of error was 2 percentage points. Sam Dillon (NYT)MEXICO: A MEETING OF TOP JUDGES  The chief justice of Mexico's 10-member Supreme court, Genaro Gongora Pimentel, visited Washington to meet with his American counterpart, Justice William H. Rehnquist. The Mexican high court has traditionally been subordinate to the country's all-powerful presidents, with some presidents simply dismissing justices whose opinions they have disliked. Mr. Gongora is seeking to modernize the Mexican system. Sam Dillon (NYT)EUROPEGERMANY: U.S. IN CLASH ON GLOBAL WARMING  At a 150-nation conference in Bonn, the United States clashed with the European Union and developing countries over how and when to ratify an anti-pollution accord reached two years ago in Kyoto, Japan. Environment ministers were deeply split over the issue of how pollution could be cut without hurting economic growth. The European Union and Japan want a global warming accord in place by 2002, but the United States declined to set a deadline. Victor Homola (NYT)LITHUANIA: PREMIER APPROVED  Parliament endorsed its conservative deputy chairman, Andrius Kubilius, 43, as the new prime minister, putting an end to weeks of political turmoil. He was nominated by President Valdas Adamkus after Rolandas Paksas resigned in protest at the privatization of the Mazeikiai oil refinery.(Agence France-Presse) SERBIA: U.S. SHIFT OFFICIAL  The Clinton administration, in a move to support political opposition to President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia, confirmed it would lift economic sanctions on Serbia if free elections were held there. Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright was joined by eight opposition leaders as she made the announcement in Washington. The administration previously said sanctions would remain until Mr. Milosevic left office or was ousted. Officials in Belgrade denounced the plan as interference in Serbia's internal affairs.(NYT)BRITAIN: PORTILLO LOOKS TO COMMONS  Michael Portillo, the former defense secretary who lost his Commons seat in 1997, has become the Conservative candidate in a secure Tory London district and is certain to return to Parliament in a by-election next month. He is widely seen as a stronger potential leader of the party than its current head, William Hague. Warren Hoge (NYT)NORTHERN IRELAND: MITCHELL REPORTS  George J. Mitchell discussed his nine-week-old effort to rescue the stalled Ulster peace accord with Prime Minister Tony Blair at 10 Downing Street and then left for Washington to brief President Clinton. The former United States senator adjourned the talks after they failed to end a deadlock over guerrilla disarmament and will reconvene them Monday in Belfast. Warren Hoge (NYT)UNITED NATIONSCOUNCIL CRITICIZED ON WAR CRIMES  The departing president of the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague said the Security Council was doing too little to help bring indicted people to justice. In a letter to the Council, Gabrielle Kirk McDonald said requests for help made by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia were too often ignored. States in the former Yugoslavia are shielding indicted men, refusing to recognize the jurisdiction of the tribunal and refusing to admit investigators, she said.(Reuters) AFRICAZIMBABWE: DOCTORS END STRIKE  Doctors in state-run hospitals ended a six-week strike after the government assured them that their concerns over pay and working conditions would be addressed. The action by hundreds of physicians forced major hospitals to send many patients home. The doctors, who say they earn the equivalent of about $160 a month, have been promised a significant pay raise by next year. Henri E. Cauvin (NYT)SOUTH AFRICA: PRISON CHIEF QUITS IN SCANDAL  The head of the country's prison system resigned amid accusations that he used government money to sponsor a soccer club and pay for a scholarship program in his name at his alma mater, Jackson State University in Mississippi. President Thabo Mbeki, who has vowed to curb government corruption, had been under pressure to dismiss the official, Khulekani Sitole. Henri E. Cauvin (NYT)ALGERIA: AMNESTY FOR 6,000  The authorities have freed 167 Muslim militants in a presidential amnesty for more than 6,000 prisoners, the official Algerian news agency reported. The agency said the amnesty for 6,683 detainees marked the 45th anniversary of the Nov. 1 revolution, the start of Algeria's war of independence against France.(Reuters) MIDDLE EASTJORDAN: DECISION ON JOURNALISTS  In a reversal, the Jordanian Press Association has decided not to expel three members who visited Israel in September or to ban them from working, the head of the association said. The move to punish the three was approved by the group's board on Oct. 19. The three, from Arabic-language dailies and the English-language Jordan Times, have repeatedly said their visit, at the invitation of Haifa University, were exercises of ''personal freedoms.''( Agence France-Presse) IRAQ: U.S. JETS ATTACK  American warplanes attacked Iraqi air-defense sites after coming under fire during routine patrols of the northern Iraq no-flight zone, the United States military said. The planes targeted artillery sites northwest of Bashiqah and north of Tall Afar, the European Command said in a statement. The jets, based in Incirlik, in southern Turkey, left the area safely, the statement said.(AP)IRAQ: 7 DIE IN ATTACK ON DISSIDENTS  Iranian opposition forces at a base 30 miles north of Basra suffered heavy casualties in a explosion they say was caused by a missile fired from Iran. Iraq said ''a foreign state'' was responsible for the deaths of 7 Iranians and Iraqis and the wounding of 78, but did not name Iran or mention missiles. Iran denied responsibility.(Reuters) ASIAARMENIA: BROTHER SUCCEEDS BROTHER  The brother of Armenia's assassinated prime minister was appointed to succeed him by President Robert Kocharyan. A spokesman said Aram Sarkisian, 38, would replace his older brother, Vazgen, who was gunned down with seven other top officials during a raid on Parliament a week ago. Aram Sarkisian is the director of a cement factory and has not been active in politics.(Reuters) SRI LANKA: REBELS PUSH ON  Tamil rebels overran several military posts in the north, killing hundreds of soldiers, an army official said. The rebels seemed to be driving the army south, a day after they stormed into Oddusudan, 155 miles north of Colombo, killing 150 soldiers.(AP)SOUTH KOREA: AIRLINE PUNISHED  The government banned Korean Air Lines from adding new international routes for one year, after American investigators said pilot error and cockpit confusion were the main causes of a 1997 jumbo jet crash in Guam that killed 228 people. Samuel Len (NYT)

In a concession to environmentalists, the Ford Motor Company said today that it would pull out of the Global Climate Coalition, a group of big manufacturers and oil and mining companies that lobbies against restrictions on emissions of gases linked to global warming. Ford's decision is the latest sign of divisions within heavy industry over how to respond to global warming. British Petroleum and Shell pulled out of the coalition two years ago following criticisms from environmental groups in Europe, where there has been more public concern than in the United States. Most scientists believe that emissions from automobiles, power plants and other man-made sources are warming the Earth's atmosphere. British Petroleum and Shell were so-called general, or junior, members of the lobbying group. Ford is the first company belonging to the board that has withdrawn, and the first American company to leave the coalition, said Frank Maisano, a spokesman for the coalition. Ford's chairman since the beginning of this year, William C. Ford Jr., is a great-grandson of Henry Ford and has long been active in environmental causes. He has said that global warming is an international problem that requires action, although he has echoed other industry leaders in opposing the global warming agreement reached two years ago in Kyoto, Japan. That agreement, signed by more than 100 nations, calls for reducing man-made emissions of carbon dioxide and other global warming gases by industrialized countries. Environmentalists had questioned whether Mr. Ford's company had shifted its position much, and demanded that Ford leave the coalition. ''Over the course of time,'' said Terry Bresnihan, a spokesman for the auto maker, ''membership in the Global Climate Coalition has become something of an impediment for Ford Motor to credibly achieving our environmental objectives.''Mr. Bresnihan said Ford remained opposed to the Kyoto agreement because developing nations are largely exempt from its rules. Connie Holmes, the coalition's chairwoman, said that the group opposed the Kyoto agreement and wanted more scientific research into whether global warming was a problem, adding that she did not believe Ford's current position was much different from the coalition's. Mr. Ford's predecessor as chairman, Alexander Trotman, who became a British life peer earlier this year, had been one of corporate America's most outspoken leaders in opposing international pacts on global warming. Lord Trotman and his counterparts from General Motors and Chrysler met with President Clinton in October 1997, and tried to talk him out of seeking an agreement two months later in Kyoto. After meeting the President, Lord Trotman held a news conference outside the White House and denounced the administration's position.

New Jersey and the Netherlands have agreed to a pilot project they hope will show the world how to help reduce carbon dioxide emissions. The agreement, which reflects the goals of an international treaty to fight global warming, will most likely involve the Netherlands' paying -- and taking credit -- for measures that will decrease pollution in New Jersey. This could help the Dutch comply with the goals set in an international agreement to combat global warming, and, in the process, help New Jersey clean its air, officials say. Several states have been investigating similar deals, but New Jersey is the first to make one. The agreement calls on the two governments to identify by the end of next year specific projects that will reduce emissions in New Jersey, and help attain goals specified by a treaty drafted in 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. A provision of the Kyoto treaty allows nations to meet their emission reduction goals essentially by paying other countries to reduce their emissions. The concept is similar to a system under the Clean Air Act that allows companies within the United States to buy and sell emission credits.''We know New Jersey has a very progressive policy, and in the Netherlands, we can learn from them,'' said Pieter Verkerk, the environmental consul at the Netherlands Embassy in Washington. ''The agreement is to find out how the credit mechanisms will work in the future.''The agreement with New Jersey, signed on Dec. 7, is permitted by a memorandum of understanding between the Dutch and United States governments that provides for cooperation between the countries on a wide range of environmental issues, Mr. Verkerk said. Robert C. Shinn, the New Jersey commissioner of environmental protection, said the agreement is the first that specifically calls for the exchange of such credits to achieve goals set by the Kyoto treaty. The treaty, known as the Kyoto Protocol, was drafted after worldwide attention was focused on global warming by the Earth Summit of 1992 in Rio de Janeiro. Reduction goals are based on a percentage of a country's 1990 emission levels, and begin taking effect in 2008. The treaty has been signed by more than 150 nations, but the United States Senate has not ratified the agreement, largely because of doubts about relinquishing control over the nation's emissions standards and the costs involved. Under one project envisioned as part of the New Jersey-Netherlands agreement, the Dutch government would pay the additional fuel cost for a power plant in Jersey City to switch from coal to natural gas. The switch would cut carbon dioxide emissions by one-third, said Eric Svensen, director of environmental policy for Public Service Electric and Gas, the utility that owns the plant. At the same time, the switch away from coal would also reduce emissions of sulfur and nitrous oxide, which contribute to smog. So New Jersey residents would get cleaner air, without having to pay extra for it. ''We wouldn't go over to natural gas currently, because natural gas is a more expensive fuel,'' Mr. Svensen said. Mr. Verkerk, the former Dutch solicitor general for environmental enforcement, said his government would buy credits to achieve up to half of its emissions reduction goal. The Dutch people will achieve the rest themselves, he said, by using cleaner fuel, curbing automobile emissions and other measures. He and Mr. Shinn, the state's commissioner of environmental protection, said that once other countries begin buying pollution credits, an international emissions credit bank could be established, allowing for more international agreements to reduce emissions. One goal of the pilot agreement, the officials said, was to help work out details of the emission credit process. ''This is very much in its infancy,'' Mr. Shinn said. New Jersey and other states have their own emission reduction goals that are components of national goals. The United States is the world's largest producer of greenhouse gases, so there is some irony, Mr. Svensen said, that its states may be the first to sell emission reduction credits.''What had always been contemplated,'' Mr. Svensen said, ''was that the U.S. would be the purchasers.''

Hillary Rodham Clinton today compared the fund-raising tactics of Rudolph W. Giuliani to those of Senator Jesse Helms, and the New York mayor, in response, dared her to try to paint him as a right-wing extremist. Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Giuliani, the presumed candidates for the United States Senate, and their surrogates traded barbs throughout a day in which both of them passed through the state Capitol without crossing paths. For Mrs. Clinton, it was another chance to suggest that the mayor was too conservative for New York State. On Sunday, The New York Times reported that Mr. Giuliani's Senate  campaign had made extensive use of fund-raising mailings to conservatives in other states. The tone of the appeals was far more hostile toward Mrs. Clinton than were his mailings in New York State.''I think he's learned from people like Jesse Helms,'' Mrs. Clinton said at a morning appearance in White Plains, ''that you run some of these campaigns, these negative campaigns, out of state so that you can go around saying you're not doing it in- state and hope that nobody will catch you. That seems to be the pattern and it's been a pretty tried-and-true technique of the right-wing Republicans for a long time.''Asked about her comments here this evening, she said, ''I did not compare anyone to Jesse Helms,'' the North Carolina Republican. But then, citing press reports, she added that Mr. Giuliani was relying on mailing lists from ''far-right organizations'' and that the two-pronged mail campaign was ''a hallmark of what Senator Helms has done for years.''At a news conference with Gov. George E. Pataki, the mayor, laughing, said, ''She said it was part of a right-wing conspiracy, right?'' That was a reference to Mrs. Clinton's claim, early in the Lewinsky investigation, that there was a ''vast right-wing conspiracy'' against her husband.''You've got a right-wing conspiracy again,'' said Mr. Giuliani, who is generally regarded -- certainly by most Republicans -- as a moderate. ''That's going to be an interesting one to try to sell. Yogi Berra has an expression for that: 'deja vu all over again.' I'm a lot of things, but you're going to try to put that label on me, give it a try. We'll see if that one doesn't backfire.''The mayor was here for his annual remarks to the Legislature about the state budget, while Mrs. Clinton came at the invitation of Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver for a private question-and-answer session with Democratic lawmakers. Mr. Giuliani's fellow Republicans, the governor and Joseph L. Bruno, the Senate majority leader, accused Mrs. Clinton of trying to upstage the mayor. ''There's no question in my mind that the fact that the first lady chose today to come is because she doesn't want people to hear the positive message of the successful record of Mayor Giuliani,'' Mr. Pataki said. Mrs. Clinton noted that Mr. Silver had arranged the visit and said, ''At last count, I've been in upstate New York in the last six months more than 30 times, and I've never run into the mayor on any of those trips.''After her meeting, several Democratic legislators said they were gravely concerned about the state of her campaign, with Mrs. Clinton trailing in public opinion surveys and fund-raising. Some lawmakers from New York City, usually the most fertile ground for a Democrat, said they thought that the mayor would win their districts. Earlier in the day, at a restaurant in White Plains, Mrs. Clinton, a new resident of nearby Chappaqua, gave  the most detailed description to date of her environmental agenda, in a speech before a mostly sympathetic audience of 100 people invited by  groups including the Sierra Club and the League of Conservation Voters. She said she would vote to ratify the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 treaty calling for worldwide cuts in emissions of gases that are thought to cause global warming. The Clinton administration has signed the treaty, but the Senate refuses to ratify it. She also said she would push for legislation to curb acid rain. In a talk sprinkled with bits of New York geography, Mrs. Clinton pointed out specific environmental problems that she would address.''I've been studying the map,'' she said, eliciting chuckles. ''There are dozens of the most wonderful names, Indian names and other names, that are really evocative of what people first saw and what they experienced. There are places like Loon Hollow Pond, but there aren't any loons left. There's been many a year since any trout, which happens to be the New York State fish, were caught in Brook Trout Lake, for example.''Mr. Giuliani again tried to distance himself from the failings of the New York City schools system and disparaged ''the bureaucratic infrastructure that is so damaging, where job protection is put ahead of helping children.'' He reiterated his contention that he should be given direct control of the schools, telling a joint Assembly-Senate committee, ''Do away with the Board of Education.''Mrs. Clinton said: ''It's appeared to me that the mayor's had control of the schools. He's hired and fired two chancellors.''

Around midnight last night, Juan Mayr, who is chairman of the global biosafety talks here, told delegates after a long day of negotiations to go back to their hotel rooms and ''dream about the precautionary approach.''It was a reference to one of the most important issues remaining in the effort to formulate the world's first treaty regulating trade in genetically modified products: Must a nation have scientific proof before it can ban a genetically engineered crop or animal? Or can it act even in the absence of scientific certainty? The ''precautionary principle,'' which allows erring on the side of safety in the absence of scientific certainty, has been enshrined in numerous environmental laws and treaties since the 1970's, but often more as a vague statement of philosophy than as a recipe for action. Depending on the outcome of negotiations here, an agreement on bio safety might contain a strong formulation authorizing the precautionary principle to be used in decision making, setting a precedent for other international agreements. It could also set a precedent for domestic debates in the United States, where controversy over food made using biotechnology is growing. Virtually no evidence exists that such foods are harmful. But critics say there is not enough information about possible health effects, so the foods should be banned or more tightly regulated. In negotiations over the biosafety agreement, the United States and several other big agricultural exporting nations say that incorporating the precautionary principle too strongly would allow countries to ban imports of genetically modified corn, soybeans or other crops simply based on fear or protectionism.''There have been some proposals that we think would redefine the concept,'' Frank E. Loy, under secretary of state for global affairs, said today. ''It would have the effect of justifying restrictions on biotechnology, including import bans, without any scientific basis.''But European countries and the developing countries, which have been pitted against the United States and a handful of its allies all week, say precaution is justified because not enough is known about the environmental effects of genetic engineering. And if a ''superweed'' or dangerous bacteria were to get loose in the environment, it could not be recalled like a defective car. ''Countries must be able to have the freedom, the sovereign right to take precautionary measures,'' said Christoph Bail, the lead negotiator for the European Union. Once damage occurs, he said, ''it would be too late to do anything about it.''European officials say they are not advocating abandoning an approach based on science. ''You cannot take action based on just fear,'' said Margot Wallstrom, the environmental commissioner of the European Union. ''You need some evidence, you need some scientific basis for action.''Some officials point out that the United States itself has endorsed the precautionary principle in treaties such as the Kyoto agreement on climate change. Steps are being taken to control gases that contribute to planetary warming, even though it could be argued that the evidence that such warming will occur is not conclusive. Washington wants to make sure any agreement on biosafety does not take precedence over the World Trade Organization rules. That is because under W.T.O. rules an import can be banned only on the basis of scientific evidence.

The Energy Department and General Electric will announce on Friday a major breakthrough in natural-gas- powered generating plants that will result in production of electricity using 5.3 percent less fuel than the best current technologies. While that percentage may seem small, it is enormous by the standards of an industry in which technologies often compete on the basis of fractions of a percentage point. The Energy Department is labeling the breakthrough ''the four-minute mile for electric plants.''The result, experts say, will be cheaper production of electricity and a significant reduction in gases thought to cause global warming. The new plant achieves 60 percent efficiency, a significant improvement over the 32 percent to 40 percent efficiency of typical coal, gas and oil plants in use today. Most of today's generating plants were built in the mid-1900's. Michehl R. Gent, president of the North American Electric Reliability Council said nearly all plants now being added run on natural gas, meaning that as overall capacity grows and as old plants are replaced with new ones, average efficiency of the system will rise sharply. Henry Linden, director of the energy and power center at the Illinois Institute of Technology and former president of the Gas Research Institute, said the introduction of high-efficiency gas plants ''is revolutionizing the global power business.''As for cutting the emission of ''greenhouse gases,'' Mr. Linden said that if the United States were to retire all its coal plants and replace them with 60-percent-efficient natural gas plants, the nation would meet two-thirds of its commitment under the Kyoto accords. The generator, which G.E. calls the H System, produces far less smog-causing nitrogen oxides than coal plants and some existing natural gas plants. The gain comes from tricks of engineering and metallurgy. The jet engine, for example, runs at temperatures above the melting point of the metal used to capture energy from the burning gases. Earlier efforts used air to cool the metal, but this air cuts efficiency. The new G.E. system uses steam instead, circulating it through serpentine channels inside the vanes and blades that direct combustion gases. The steam is then recaptured to make yet more electricity. Ordinary turbine blades are made of metal that is formed by millions of tiny crystals; under stress, the blades can break at the boundaries between crystals. The H System blades are giant, single crystals. In remarks to be delivered Friday, Energy Secretary Bill Richardson calls the new plant ''nothing less than the future of electric power generation for this country and for most of the world.''He adds, ''Pardon me for crowing.''The department put $100 million into research and development for the new design; General Electric says it spent another $200 million. The system produces a kilowatt-hour of electricity -- an amount of power that will keep 10 100-watt bulbs burning for an hour -- on 5,685 British thermal units, or B.T.U.'s, of gas, compared with 5,990 B.T.U.'s for older gas systems. A good coal plant uses nearly 10,000 B.T.U.'s to produce the same amount of electricity. The difference may come to only one-  or two-tenths of a cent per kilowatt hour, not enough for a residential customer to feel, but important for some industries. At current natural gas prices, moving from 57 percent efficiency, the current standard, to 60 percent efficiency would save about $20 million over the 20-year life of a 400-megawatt power plant. But beyond the dollar savings, the development also means less carbon dioxide, the main gas thought to aggravate global climate change.

One day last week, an ABC crew in Miami invested in a crane across the street from the great uncle of Elian Gonzalez, a classic maneuver intended to guarantee clear shots of the child if the authorities sealed the perimeter of the house. It looked like ABC would have a lead on the competition. But an ABC news executive ordered the crew to forget the crane. Why risk needless criticism about prying cameras when the perimeter had not yet been sealed? In the scheme of things, it was probably a good idea. The last thing that ABC News needed was another controversy. For the last three weeks, events behind the scene at ABC News have seemed almost as compelling as the news itself. In the process, internal differences have been exposed and the president of ABC News, David Westin, has faced uncomfortable questions about his grip on the division and his mandate to take bold strokes to break through the cluttered marketplace of news. First, a staff rebellion quashed a move to make Mark Fuhrman, the detective accused of racism in the O. J. Simpson case, a paid consultant for ''Good Morning America'' on a murder story. Then, critics assailed the division for broadcasting an interview with the 6-year-old Gonzalez boy, which they said violated a rule not to put young children under such a spotlight. Then, news broke that the division had employed the actor and teenage idol Leonardo DiCaprio to interview President Clinton for a prime-time special program on global warming -- a move that has been variously described as a new low in celebrity journalism or an inventive move to attract young viewers to news programs. Now Mr. Westin will decide whether to scrap the DiCaprio interview and how prominently the star should be featured in the special, scheduled for some time next week. The raw footage, which was being edited by producers over the weekend, was said by the White House to include Mr. DiCaprio asking Mr. Clinton about the Kyoto environmental accord. In another segment, others say, Mr. DiCaprio, who has been designated chairman of the Earth Day 2000 celebration, was taped sitting on a rock by a pond he used to visit as a boy, discussing the depletion of the frog population there. The production is said to all have an MTV feel and features short segments about global warming and related environmental issues photographed from Alaska to Atlanta. As it stood this weekend, both Mr. DiCaprio and the correspondent Chris Cuomo introduce the segments, basically as co-hosts. Seldom has the editing process been so closely watched. Whatever he decides, Mr. Westin will send a signal about what he thinks is appropriate, as the pressure to rise above other media outlets -- to be distinctive -- becomes ever greater. That pressure, Mr. Westin acknowledges, is prompting him to encourage his producers to try new techniques to hold their audience, if not expand it, and make it younger.''I think in a first-rate news division of any sort, one has to be moving forward,'' Mr. Westin said last week in a telephone interview. ''We can't keep programming news programs just the way we did five or 10 years ago. Society has changed around us; our competition has changed.''Mr. Westin said he wants his producers to devise programming that will stand out. But, he quickly added, standard journalistic lines should not be crossed. Is there a clear understanding at ABC News of exactly what Mr. Westin means? Not consistently, executives acknowledge. Mr. Westin was faced with demands for explanations about the DiCaprio affair from Sam Donaldson, Peter Jennings and Ted Koppel, who are said to be uncomfortable with Mr. Westin's edict to try new things, though understanding of it.''Yes, it's a changed business and we ought to recognize that,'' Mr. Donaldson said last week. ''But we also all have to recognize that we have to do things according to the standards that will help us retain our credibility.''Rudy Bednar, executive producer of the special, said it is causing too much fuss. ''It was truth in advertising from the get-go with Leo's opening line to the president that he's not a journalist,'' Me. Bednar said. He said the criticism, both in the organization and outside, has been unfair. ''It's like the Moral Majority condemning a film and you ask them, 'Have you seen it?' and they say 'no,' '' Mr. Bednar remarked. ABC News has never walked in lock-step. There have always been fiefs -- of stars and of individual programs. And there have long been two schools of thought about the mixture of news and entertainment. But ordering change and managing the various forces is a tall order, especially for Mr. Westin, 47, a corporate lawyer and a relative newcomer to journalism who has had to fill the shoes of his predecessor, Roone Arledge. The inexperience has, at times, put him at a handicap in the news division, and in recent weeks, allies have been placed in the embarrassing position of portraying him as the victim of events. In mid-March, some staff members nearly rebelled when it was disclosed that Mr. Fuhrman had been hired by Shelley Ross, the executive producer of ''Good Morning America'' as a paid consultant to win his exclusive insight into the killing in 1975 of Martha Moxley, a Greenwich, Conn., teenager. Some credit Mr. Fuhrman with helping successfully reopen their investigation into Michael Skakel, the Kennedy cousin now charged in her death. A news staff member found out about the hiring of Mr. Fuhrman after seeing a guest list. A furor followed, the deal was called off, and it was agreed that he would not be paid for appearances. A week later, Diane Sawyer interviewed Elian Gonzalez for ''Good Morning America'' and ''20/20'' in the days leading up to the Justice Department's decision to send him home to Cuba with his father. According to ABC News executives' accounts, they did not want Ms. Sawyer to ask or place emphasis on whether the boy wanted to go back to Cuba. An ABC spokeswoman, Eileen Murphy, insisted that news executives requested only that Elian's desires not be made a focal point. When the segment was broadcast, Ms. Sawyer told her audience that the boy said he wanted to return, but said that she would not show him saying it because of the sensitive nature of the case. The report was deplored by media critics. Some executives say that if the question about returning to Cuba had not come up, Mr. Westin would not have taken so much heat. In the matter of Mr. DiCaprio, executives said Mr. Westin had been misled, though not maliciously. After the DiCaprio interview was disclosed in The Washington Post, Mr. Westin sent an e-mail message to staff members saying that no interview had been planned and that Mr. DiCaprio was supposed to do a walk-through at the White House and discuss only the White House's own environmental practices, like how it recycles its trash. He said President Clinton might appear during the tour. The White House called this version of events ''rife with inaccuracies,'' and it was disclosed that Mr. DiCaprio did in fact draw up his questions in advance, with some assistance from ABC News producers. This all begged the question of what is the difference between an interview that is conducted while walking or sitting.''ABC doesn't know whether Leo and I had an interview, a walk-through or a drive-by,'' Mr. Clinton joked at the annual Radio and Television Correspondents' Association dinner on Thursday. ''Don't you news people ever learn? It isn't the mistake that kills you. It's the cover-up.''Paul Friedman, executive vice president of ABC News, said that at the time Mr. Westin wrote the e-mail message, he did believe what he was asserting. He added that Mr. Westin had been given ''incomplete'' information by his own producers, who allowed Mr. DiCaprio to ask the president why global warming did not get the same attention as deficiencies in health care. And Mr. Westin said on Friday, ''It is clear to me now that ABC news people worked with Leonardo DiCaprio to prepare him to ask some questions that go beyond what I would have put on the air.''Mr. Friedman said Mr. DiCaprio's White House visit ''started out with all the best intentions.''''Some mistakes were made,'' he said. ''David was victimized by those mistakes and by incomplete information given to him after the fact.''The program's executive producer, Mr. Bednar, said it had not been his intention to mislead Mr. Westin.''It was the communicators here miscommunicating,'' he said, adding that in hindsight, he thought he could have been more emphatic in telling Mr. Westin that an interview about general environmental matters had always been planned and that specific questions were prepared for Mr. DiCaprio. Mr. Westin knows that criticisms of his leadership are being made and, considering the last three weeks, he said some of that is valid. That is why, he said, he recently reorganized his division and named Mr. Friedman, who has 18 years in the division and the respect of the old guard, as his executive vice president. With that done, Mr. Westin and his top executives said they intend to keep pushing for change, even though it might mean ruffling some feathers. The reason: Network newscasts generally draw an older audience -- people in their 40's, 50's and 60's. Younger viewers are not drawn to newscasts. The decision to produce the DiCaprio special was to bring these viewers into the ABC fold, Mr. Westin said.''If we don't add a younger audience, sooner or later our audience will die,'' Mr. Westin said. The tough part is: Can he keep ABC's news practices out of the news, too? MEDIA

Fourteen-year-old girls everywhere can breathe  now that ABC News has decided to go ahead and broadcast its Earth Day special in which Leonardo DiCaprio, crusading journalist, questions President Clinton about global warming. Personally, I know I'll be waiting for his question on the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change science-assessment revisions, especially as they apply to new studies on ocean-current fluid dynamics when compared to the watts-per-square-foot forcing of anthropogenic gases, and how this will affect the Kyoto Annex I plans for joint implementation of carbon sequestration. Be these things as they may, ABC asserts that it is sending a teen heartthrob to interview the president about global warming in order to raise public awareness of the issue. But it's fair to suppose that one reason public concern over the greenhouse effect is low is exactly that Hollywood is on the case. When the networks and movie studios treat global warming as a subject so trifling, it can be safely passed off from serious discussion to glam events hosted by celebrities. This is hardly the first time the entertainment world has tried to raise awareness on global warming. In 1993, CBS broadcast a preposterous miniseries, ''The Fire Next Time,'' to great fanfare. It depicted the United States in the year 2007 as a nation destroyed by global warming. In the miniseries, a man and boy attempt to travel a nation wracked by searing heat, sustained droughts, monster storms and dangerous exposure to bad dialogue. Conservative critics were aghast, saying the miniseries indoctrinated mass audiences with greenhouse scenarios far worse than any predicted even by the most pessimistic scientists. Yet there was no evidence that public concern for the environment rose in the wake of the CBS broadcasts, and shortly afterward Americans voted in the anti-environmental Gingrich Congress. By trivializing the greenhouse effect into something as ludicrous as the subject of a sci-fi miniseries, the network might have convinced mass audiences that global warming was just another Hollywood gimmick, which, unfortunately, it may not be. Ditto for Kevin Costner's ''Waterworld,'' a sci-fi epic that depicted an Earth inundated with oceans engorged by greenhouse-induced melting of the polar ice caps, again a much worse outcome even the most pessimistic models project. Mr. Costner justified his movie and its inflated budget with some blather about raising public awareness. It didn't help the planet or the box-office numbers. How many stars have really ''raised awareness'' about an environmental cause in a lasting way? A decade ago, when concerns about the rain forests were rising, Sting made himself Mr. Rain Forest; today the rain forest continues to shrink and  public concern hovers near zero (although the Rainforest Cafe chain has been packing in customers). No doubt most stars are sincere about the causes they attach themselves to. The problem is, while the public admires stars, it also sees them as about the most pampered people around, with little connection to real life. Thus the public can be forgiven if it suspected that Ted Danson, founder of the American Oceans Campaign and host of the TV documentary ''Danger at the Beach,'' might have been primarily concerned about the waterfront near his Martha's Vineyard home. Global warming is a slow-building problem for which scientific evidence is beginning to increase. Reform is possible but will take many years. In the interim, how many celebrities will get bored with the details and jump on to the next fad? It is always possible that ABC is on to something with the actor-as-journalist approach, and a Leo-Clinton pose fest will get young people excited about working for greenhouse-effect reform. But it seems more likely that the program will serve to make the issue seem simplistic. The alternative -- slow-moving interviews with scientists, thinkers and economists who have just slightly less than Mr. DiCaprio's squeal appeal -- will never be a ratings winner. But it would be credible, and the gradual accrual of credibility is what is needed today for greenhouse effect concerns. Gregg Easterbrook is a columnist for BeliefNet. com and author of Beside Still Waters: Searching for Meaning in an Age of Doubt.

Today, on the 30th anniversary of the first Earth Day, there is much to celebrate and much to remind us of the unfinished business of protecting the planet. While the job of cleaning the water, air and land continues, the world must begin tackling the less visible threat of global warming, an issue largely unknown 30 years ago. This new threat is less immediate and less easily solved, and therefore will require an even stronger commitment in the years ahead. This is essentially the message of the organizers of Earth Day 2000. In 1970, some American rivers were so polluted with chemicals that they were fire hazards. Big cities were choked in smog, toxic wastes leached freely into the land, and bird and fish species were disappearing. In a generation's time, with the creation of the National Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the Endangered Species Act and the Environmental Protection Agency, a great deal has been achieved to reverse decades of environmental degradation. This shift was propelled by citizen activists and a handful of political leaders who first gave voice to a broadening ethic that made protecting the environment a political as well as moral obligation. The same public passion and political will must now be summoned to confront the global greenhouse effect. Congress has given little attention to this issue. For that reason, the Earth Day organizers have done a public service by making global warming a focus of this year's program. Unlike polluted air and contaminated water, global warming is not a local problem that can be seen or felt. But its impact on every region on earth could be devastating. Most scientists agree that the earth's climate is warming, due at least partly to the accumulation of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide that trap the sun's energy. Although the effect may be gradual, the consequences could be catastrophic, with increased floods and droughts, rising sea levels and destruction of ecosystems caused by climate change. In 1997 more than 150 nations, including the United States, signed the Kyoto Protocol to limit the amount of greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere through the burning of fossil fuels. The agreement calls for industrialized nations to cut their emissions by 2010. But few nations have moved to carry out the agreement. The United States is the largest greenhouse gas emitter, but the Senate is opposed to ratification of the Kyoto agreement and the policies needed to carry it out. Curbing these gases requires intensive energy conservation and the promotion of cleaner energy sources such as solar and wind power. The political and economic hurdles are substantial, both in this country and abroad. They can be overcome if the public is educated about the importance of this issue. The 30-year history of the Earth Day movement shows that when people are awakened to an environmental crisis, they will ultimately demand change in the way we live.

EUROPESCOTLAND: SEEKING LOCKERBIE DELAY -- After surprise defense plans to produce more than 100 witnesses from abroad, prosecutors will ask the Scottish High Court to postpone the May 3 start of the trial of two Libyans in the bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie that killed 270 people. The request will be heard tomorrow at a former Dutch military base where the case is to be tried under Scottish legal procedures. Prosecutors say that despite frequent requests, they were given no advance notice of the 119 witnesses. Warren Hoge (NYT)TURKEY: FIGHTING INFLATION -- Six zeroes will be removed from the Turkish lira at the end of next year or the beginning of 2002, the central bank governor, Gazi Ercel, announced. He said the move would be part of an effort to bring the 65 percent inflation rate down to single digits within two years. One dollar now buys nearly 600,000 lira. Stephen Kinzer (NYT)GERMANY: AUTOBAHN SLOWDOWN -- Environment Minister Jurgen Trittin called for stricter enforcement of speed limits on autobahns to help reduce carbon dioxide emissions. He also wants a speed limit imposed on the 25 percent of the network not now subject to any limit at all. Mr. Trittin's Green Party has long demanded a 60-m. p. h. limit, saying it was one way of meeting pollution goals set in the 1997 Kyoto accord on global warming. Victor Homola (NYT)MONTENEGRO: TIES TO ALBANIA -- The Yugoslav republic signed two agreements to strengthen relations with Albania, snubbing Belgrade, which broke off diplomatic ties with Albania last year. The Montenegrin foreign minister, Branko Lukovac, and his Albanian counterpart, Paskal Milo, signed an agreement on economic, trade and cultural cooperation.(Reuters) LATVIA: NOMINEE FOR PREMIER -- President Vaira Vike- Freiberga nominated the mayor of Riga, Andris Berzins, left, as prime minister, paving the way for a new government that the mayor said might be formed as soon as next week. Ms. Vike-Freiberga, speaking at a news conference, ended speculation that she might reject Mr. Berzins and gave him her support to form the country's ninth government in just under 10 years.(Reuters) THE AMERICASMEXICO: IMMUNITY PLEDGE -- Francisco Labastida, the governing party's presidential nominee, pledged that if elected he would strip cabinet members of immunity from criminal prosecution. His pledge would not affect the status of Tourism Secretary Oscar Espinoza, whom President Ernesto Zedillo is shielding from prosecution on charges that he embezzled $50 million while serving as Mexico City mayor. Sam Dillon (NYT)ARGENTINA: EX-OFFICERS REPORTED HELD -- Three former military officers have been detained by a judge investigating the disappearance of 30 political prisoners during Argentina's past military regime, the national news agency Diarios y Noticias reported. The judge ordered the detention of former Lieut. Col. Enrique Moner Ruiz, a retired major, Gustavo Alsina, and a retired sergeant, Miguel Angel Perez, the agency said.(AP)ASIAINDIA: DIVISION OVER DROUGHT -- All the major political parties met to discuss a drought that is affecting 50 million people in five states. Leaders of the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, which heads the ruling coalition, called for a united front. But there was dissension, even from the party's main coalition partner, the Telugu Desam Party from the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. One of its leaders complained that Andhra had not received enough help. Celia W. Dugger (NYT)SRI LANKA: BODY HANDOVER -- The separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam handed over the bodies of 126 government soldiers killed in the rebels' successful drive to take the strategic military base at Elephant Pass, which connects the mainland to the Jaffna Peninsula, bringing the total death toll to 214. Military analysts say the fall of Elephant Pass leaves Jaffna vulnerable to rebel attack. Celia W. Dugger (NYT)AFRICAZIMBABWE: MORE MUGABE FOES SLAIN -- The new opposition party, the Movement for Democratic Change, said two more of its supporters have died in attacks by ruling party loyalists. At least six supporters of the new party have now been killed in political violence as Zimbabwe prepares for parliamentary elections. Henri E. Cauvin (NYT)NIGERIA: $1 BILLON FOR OIL STATES -- Under a new oil revenue-sharing formula, the nine oil-producing states have received 13 percent of oil revenues so far this year, for a total of $1.1 billion, according to the federal government. The states of the Niger Delta, which produce almost all of the country's two million barrels of crude a day but have remained severely impoverished, have been clamoring for a greater share of the oil money. Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)MIDDLE EASTWEST BANK: KING VISITS ARAFAT -- King Abdullah of Jordan flew to Ramallah for a 90-minute meeting with the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat, his first visit to the former Jordanian territory of the West Bank since he assumed the throne 14 months ago. Neither Mr. Arafat nor the king made any public comment during the visit, which Jordan said was an expression of support for the Palestinian quest for an independent state. William A. Orme, Jr. IRAQ: U.S. BOMBS IN NORTH -- Responding to Iraqi fire, American warplanes bombed Iraq's air-defense system near Bashiqah, 250 miles north of Baghdad, in the northern no-flight zone, the United States military said. An Iraqi military spokesman told the official news agency that a water tanker driver died in the bombing.(AP)

Over the last 150 years, the burning of coal, oil and natural gas has released some 270 billion tons of carbon into the air in the form of heat-trapping carbon dioxide. If all that had stayed in the atmosphere, much of the substantial global warming predicted for a century from now might have already taken place. Luckily, more than half the carbon dioxide emitted by fossil-fuel burning is absorbed from the air by the oceans, by plants (which use it in converting sunlight to chemical energy) and by soils. Fewer than half the emissions, scientists believe, remain airborne to warm the earth. All of this is part of one of nature's grand and endlessly complicated global recycling networks. In it, carbon is constantly exchanged among the air, the terrestrial biosphere, the oceans and the solid rock of the earth at varying rates on time scales ranging from hours to millions of years. Now, as the economic and political difficulty of reducing carbon dioxide emissions at the source becomes ever more obvious, a broad-based move is under way to manipulate the carbon cycle so that it will remove more of the heat-trapping gases from the air. It is an ambitious idea, but on closer inspection one surrounded by questions, potential risks and obstacles. In one approach, researchers are investigating ways to remove carbon chemically from industrial and automotive emissions before they are released to the atmosphere, then to sequester it at some other way station in the natural carbon cycle -- by injecting the removed carbon back into underground reservoirs or into the ocean, for instance. The United States Department of Energy has expanded research into carbon-removal technologies at eight of its national laboratories. But this option, the department said in a recent study, is ''truly radical'' and most experts believe it is some distance from providing a practical alternative. More promising in the near term, many scientists believe, are prospects for increasing the absorption of atmospheric carbon dioxide by what is called the terrestrial biosphere: that is, the whole complex of living things on land, mainly plants and various tiny inhabitants and detritus of the soil. Every time a plant sprouts and grows to maturity, it absorbs carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, breaks it down chemically and uses carbon as construction material for roots, stem, branches, flowers and leaves. When the plant dies, some of the carbon goes back into the atmosphere, but some is also released into the soil as the dead plant decays. Decomposing animals, including people, further add to the carbon reservoir in the soil. Globally, soil contains about five times as much carbon as vegetation. The expansion of these carbon reservoirs, or ''sinks,'' in vegetation and soil has been sanctioned as one way industrialized countries might meet their obligations  under the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which is aimed at reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases. Lately, intense argument has developed over the degree to which countries like the United States, which may have great potential for expanding its carbon sinks, ought to be allowed to meet their emissions reduction targets under the protocol by means like planting trees, improving forest management and conserving soils rather than reducing carbon dioxide emissions from cars, factories and power generating stations. Delegates from more than 100 countries are to grapple with the issue when they meet in November in The Hague for what is widely seen as a make-or-break effort to make the Kyoto Protocol operational. The rules governing carbon sinks are among the many sets of yet-to-be adopted regulations necessary to put the protocol into effect, and only a few countries have ratified the agreement pending action on them.  The United States, where the protocol has encountered strong opposition in Congress on several grounds, is one of those holding back. In preparation for the critical November meeting, scientists of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, created by the United Nations more than a decade ago to advise the world's governments, issued a report on the carbon issue at a meeting last week in Montreal. The analysis suggested that expansion of terrestrial carbon sinks in the industrialized countries could potentially more than enable them to meet their entire combined emissions reduction quota under the protocol. But experts associated with the report questioned how much of that potential could be achieved, given the difficulty of actually expanding the world's carbon sinks in practice.''Judging the technical potential is easy,'' said Dr. Robert T. Watson, chairman of the intergovernmental panel, who is also the chief atmospheric scientist and environmental adviser of the World Bank. ''The real question is, what is the likelihood of realizing that technical potential?''Under the Kyoto Protocol, the rich industrial countries as a group are obligated to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions 5 percent below 1990 levels by about 2010. The reductions are widely seen as a first step in eventually stabilizing atmospheric concentrations. If emissions are not reduced, prominent scientists say, the average global temperature will rise by about 3.5 degrees Fahrenheit by the year 2100. (By comparison, the world is now 5 to 9 degrees warmer than in the depths of the last ice age 18,000 to 20,000 years ago.)This much warming, the experts say, would bring rising seas, more severe droughts, rainstorms, heat waves and floods, along with broad shifts in climatic and agricultural zones that would benefit some regions but seriously harm others. Environmentalists and some parties to the Kyoto Protocol, especially the European Union, strenuously object to allowing any country to meet all or most of its emissions reduction goal by expanding carbon sinks.''Sucking carbon out of the atmosphere is not the same as preventing it permanently from leaving the exhaust pipe or power plant,'' said Jennifer Morgan, director of the World Wildlife Fund's climate change campaign. Environmentalists argue that since forests can always be cut down as well as planted, and soils can always be plowed up as well as conserved, the terrestrial biosphere is not nearly as secure a carbon reservoir as the underground reservoirs where coal, oil and gas are contained. So, they say, why remove them from that secure spot in the first place? They also fear that reliance on sinks to meet the Kyoto targets could delay the adoption of measures to reduce fossil fuel use and replace it with other energy technologies. In any event, scientists say, carbon sinks will eventually probably reach a saturation point, at which they will be unable to absorb any more carbon dioxide. The dominant view therefore remains that if the world is serious about reducing and stabilizing the atmospheric concentrations, emissions must be cut at the source by burning fossil fuels more efficiently, switching from relatively high-carbon fuels like coal to lower-carbon natural gas, and replacing fossil fuels altogether by alternatives like hydrogen fuel cells. Given the slow progress in that direction, though, proponents of the carbon sink idea argue that it could be a valuable interim measure. In many ways, however, human activity has been shrinking carbon sinks rather than expanding them.  Deforestation and farming have obliterated great stretches of forest and grassland that once absorbed carbon dioxide. Farming has also chopped up soils in ways that cause them to give off carbon dioxide rather than to sequester it. In fact, said the scientific report issued in Montreal, human use of the terrestrial biosphere, including the burning of wood, has released some 135 billion tons of carbon into the air since 1850 -- about half as much as has been emitted by fossil fuel burning. The net result of all this is that overall atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide are about 30 percent higher now than at the start of the industrial revolution. A de facto counterattack has been under way for some time in the Northern Hemisphere, where the replanting of forests on deforested lands has made headway in recent decades. One provision of the Kyoto Protocol allows for industrialized countries to gain credit toward their reduction targets for tree planting since 1990 -- but also to incur debits for any deforestation since then. To reap meaningful credit, a country would have to show a net gain. The protocol also allows countries to gain credit for reductions through a variety of other ways of expanding terrestrial carbon stocks should the parties to the agreement so decide.  These include, for instance, expanding carbon stores in soil through no-till agriculture, in which no plowing takes place and seeds are sown in the carbon-rich detritus of the previous year's harvest. Other possibilities include conversion of cropland into grassland, fertilization of pastureland and forest management practices designed to increase carbon stocks -- for example, lengthening the period between harvests of a forest's timber, or promoting faster tree growth and thicker stands of trees, plantation-style. Estimates suggest that these kinds of measures might allow some countries to achieve large cuts in net carbon dioxide emissions. The potential of such measures in the United States, Canada and Russia is great, according to a recent calculation made for the World Wildlife Fund by Kevin Gurney, an atmospheric researcher at Colorado State University who studies the carbon cycle. Mr. Gurney estimated, for example, that without planting any trees, the measures would potentially enable the United States to remove about 150 million tons of carbon a year from the atmosphere. This exceeds its Kyoto emissions reduction target by tens of millions of tons.  ''They're pretty big,'' Mr. Gurney said of the estimates. The Montreal report estimated that in theory, measures other than tree-planting by the industrialized countries could remove nearly 290 million more tons of carbon a year from the atmosphere by about 2010 than are removed by such measures now. By comparison, the Kyoto Protocol would require the rich countries to cut emissions by about 200 million tons a year below 1990 levels by about 2010. The report also raised caveats about how much of this estimated potential might be achieved. Even with ''an ambitious policy agenda,'' it said, the estimates were ''likely to be on the high side.''Far smaller gains could be achieved by the rich countries by planting trees and slowing deforestation, the report concluded. It said that a 20 percent increase in forest planting would probably offset no more than 3 million tons of carbon emissions a year, while slowing deforestation by 20 percent could offset about 18 million tons. Even if the potential for carbon sequestration can be realized to a substantial degree, many headaches still present themselves. For instance, forest growth is spurred -- and terrestrial carbon stocks are increased -- by a warming climate, and by rising levels of carbon dioxide and of atmospheric nitrogen deposited on forests as a result of industrial emissions. In assessing a country's carbon stocks for purposes of assigning credit, how can these effects of human activity be separated from the growth in carbon stocks brought about by tree-planting efforts alone?  It is almost impossible to make such a separation, Dr. Watson said. Another difficulty for some kinds of carbon sequestration efforts is that of monitoring and accounting for carbon stocks. Although there are well-established means of measuring the increase of carbon in a stand of growing trees, other sinks may present problems. One way to get around the difficulty in the case of agricultural soils might be to set up a business-as-usual control plot, in which conventional farming methods are used, against which to measure the change in carbon stocks as a result of no-till farming. Then there are ecological concerns. For instance, managers of carbon-sequestration projects might be tempted to replace naturally functioning forests with tree plantations, which in biological terms are comparatively poor and sterile, with little of the biological richness and variety of the wild woods. Likewise, managers might be tempted to cut down mature forests so as to plant new, faster-growing ones that sequester carbon at a higher rate. It is on questions of detail like these that the success or failure of the Kyoto Protocol may ultimately hinge.

The Clinton administration's global warming report, released in draft this week, is a puzzling document. It touts assumptions far more pessimistic than those in mainstream climatology. And while presenting itself as a scientific document, it also boasts of being built on ''a national discourse'' with ''farmers, ranchers, engineers, scientists, business people, local government officials'' expressing a ''unique level of stakeholder involvement'' -- in other words, nonscientists who might have lobbying reasons for wanting to influence the report. Whether or not these flaws are politically fatal, here's the puzzling part: Despite them, the report is probably basically right. The federal assessment of global warming was ordered by Congress and elevated to urgency by the White House in 1997 around the time of the Kyoto greenhouse treaty talks. Its central prediction is that by 2100, temperatures in the United States will have risen by 5 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit. This is a much bleaker estimate than that of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a United Nations affiliate under whose auspices hundreds of the world's researchers have been debating greenhouse questions since the 1980's. The panel makes a ''best estimate'' of 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100; its worst-case estimate is 6 degrees. Defenders of the administration report note that it concentrates on North America and that warming effects may be especially pronounced in higher latitudes. The science on this point is shaky, a reason why the United Nations panel has avoided making temperature projections by region. The authors of the administration report relied on what was essentially a merging of two greenhouse simulation models that disagree on many points. For example, one predicts a catastrophic drought that kills off all trees of the American Southeast; the other forecasts increased rainfall and forest expansion in the Southeast. Statisticians know that merging two approximations does not produce precision; rather, it produces galimatias. Considering that many environmentalists, including Al Gore, have for years been urging Americans to believe the United Nations panel, it seems peculiar that the administration's report should diverge from it so sharply. Also open to question is the fact that the report's overview draft was been made public even though a few of the underlying studies are still not complete. It's hard not to suspect rushing for political purposes; perhaps there was a ''unique level of stakeholder involvement'' on the part of the Gore campaign. The misgivings about the administration report are unfortunate because the scientific case for an artificial greenhouse is growing ever more persuasive. Global temperatures have increased roughly 1 degree Fahrenheit in the past 100 years, and there are other, more telling climate signals: statistically significant changes in postwar rainfall patterns in North America; springs arriving one day earlier each three years; water-level cycles of the Great Lakes showing progressively earlier springs and later winters. In March, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that global ocean temperatures are rising: because oceans cover most of Earth's surface, this may be more revealing than land temperatures. Meanwhile, negotiations on the Kyoto agreement have generally been positive. President Clinton signed the Kyoto proposal in 1997 but has never submitted it for ratification because the Senate voted 95-0 not to approve any deal that failed to include the developing world. But developing nations, which initially viewed the Kyoto plan as a Western trick to slow their economies, are beginning to show support. India, for example, has reversed its position and now endorses the sort of clean-energy development that would make greenhouse reform possible. Of equal importance, the European Union nations, which initially opposed the American idea of using market-based carbon trading to reduce global warming gases, are beginning to back it. Carbon trading is favored almost unanimously by economists, many of whom project that if achieved through market mechanisms, greenhouse gas reduction will not harm world economies. David Sandalow, the assistant secretary of state who negotiated the  breakthrough with India, says, ''Many of the open issues in the Kyoto treaty are gradually being ironed out.''Greenhouse action seems increasingly important, and the chances for it seem increasingly favorable, whether under the Kyoto treaty or through some new agreement. Political overselling of the kind found in the federal global warming study isn't necessary; consensus science and economics are more than enough. Gregg Easterbrook is a senior editor of The New Republic and Beliefnet.

Following are excerpts from Vice President Al Gore's speech today on energy policy, as released by his campaign:All of you who drove to work today know that the cost of gasoline is simply too high for America's working families. In the first part of this year, oil company profits increased nearly 500 percent. That's why I've called for a federal investigation of concentration, noncompetitiveness and pricing practices in the oil industry. Now that the investigation has started, I would like to call for public hearings so the voices of American consumers can be heard. But now is also the time to recognize that the challenge we face is even broader than soaring gasoline prices. We see the same underlying problem in our aging power systems that are becoming less reliable. And we see it in the old engines and power plants that waste so much energy and in doing so create way too much pollution that makes our air unhealthy, and our world warmer. But we don't have to accept a future of more pollution. We don't have to accept a future where kids and grandparents have to stay indoors on a muggy day, and where the days themselves get muggier still. Here's the good news: we have the means and the technology to meet all these challenges. . . .Today, I'm proposing a new Energy Security and Environment Trust, a bold and unprecedented commitment to achieve an even more prosperous economy, powered by cleaner, more reliable energy, in a healthy, truly livable environment. First, we will modernize and improve our nation's power systems, to prevent future power outages before they affect you and your family. We will ensure reliable and affordable electricity by providing new incentives to industry to improve our power lines. And we will give special incentives to companies that want to use their own, more efficient power systems on-site, or use renewable energy, such as wind or solar power. Second, we will do more to protect our kids and our parents from the smog and soot that cause asthma. One of the best ways we can do this is by giving new incentives to industry to transform dirty old power plants into modern, clean sources of energy. For that, we will need enforceable, market-based standards that are comprehensive instead of piecemeal. And we need to end monopolies, and instead let competition bring us clean energy and smaller energy bills. We are blessed with abundant supplies of coal, petroleum and natural gas; we have to use these resources wisely. With new technology, we can make all our energy sources cleaner, safer and healthier for our families. We will bring together the best minds from the private sector and create an open competition to design the best incentives for old power plants and industries to change, to improve, to modernize and move ahead. Through the power of free markets, we will take a dramatic step forward for our children's health, which will also be a dramatic new step toward a stable climate. Third, while we modernize our power systems and reduce pollution here at home, we must aggressively pursue the global market for new energy technology that is expected to reach $10 trillion in the next two decades, as other countries also take steps to overcome pollution and the threat of global warming. As the world implements the Kyoto treaty, we must ensure that all developed and developing nations do their part. Fourth, as we reduce America's dependence on big oil and imported oil for the long term by finding new and better ways to produce clean, affordable, and reliable energy here in America we will work even more closely with industry and labor to bring cleaner cars, trucks and buses to showrooms and streets around the world. This is a multi-hundred-billion-dollar industry; we've got to seize the lead, before Japan or any nation beats us to it. Fifth, we will cut taxes so families can start buying those 100-mile-per-gallon cars as they hit the showrooms. Even the best innovations are of little use if they are stuck in a lab, unaffordable and unattainable to you, your family or your business. But tax credits can make them competitive, and then mass production will bring the prices down even further. We will also give tax credits so that it is not far-reaching fantasy to put a solar roof on your home, or to renovate your home to make it more energy efficient, but an affordable and money-saving practicality. We will also make major new investments in light rail and mass transit, to make your neighborhoods more livable and to liberate families from having to buy gas at any price, if they'd really prefer not to. Finally, we will do more than use the technologies of the future; we as a nation will aggressively invest in the skill and creativity of the people who discover them, and the factory workers who produce them. There will be no new bureaucracies; no new agencies or organizations, because the era of old government is over. We'll measure performance carefully and ensure that we reach our goals with common-sense standards. But it is America's innovators and entrepreneurs, investors and working men and women who will forge the real solutions, not the federal government. I know these challenges are not easy. And for me, they have never been without controversy. But my commitment to the environment has always run deeper than politics. We have to do what's right for our earth because it is the moral thing to do. It involves all of our lives, from the simple security of having safe, reliable, affordable electricity for your home; to America's ability to keep building and selling the best new cars, trucks, and technology to the world; to guarding our children from the summer smog that is made worse by global warming, and securing for our grandchildren the expectation of a joyful array of seasons that we took for granted when we grew up ourselves. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN

A new analysis of the climate of the last 1,000 years suggests that human activity is the dominant force behind the sharp global warming trend seen in the 20th century. The study, by Dr. Thomas J. Crowley, a geologist at Texas A&M University, found that natural factors, like fluctuations in sunshine or volcanic activity, were powerful influences on temperatures in past centuries. But he found that they accounted for only 25 percent of the warming since 1900. The lion's share, he said, can be attributed to human influences, particularly to rising levels of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping ''greenhouse gases'' that come from the burning of fuels and forests.''These twin lines of evidence provide further support for the idea that the greenhouse effect is already here,'' Dr. Crowley wrote in describing the work in today's issue of the journal Science. Several climate experts said his findings offered the most direct link yet between people and the 1.1 degree rise in average global temperature over the last 100 years. The study has already caused debate among camps of scientists who dispute the climate records used in Dr. Crowley's analysis and others who say the oceans play an underappreciated role in controlling warming and cooling of the planet. But many climatologists said it marked a substantial move forward in understanding forces that have warmed the earth and are likely to continue warming it. Resolving this puzzle -- the balance between human and natural influences -- has been something of a holy grail in atmospheric science, particularly because the answer could determine whether countries enact plans in coming years to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. Yesterday, many scientists said that Dr. Crowley's work, while not definitive, was helping build a strong case.''This seems to reinforce the notion that we're into a new mode beyond simple natural forcing, that something else is taking place,'' said Dr. Raymond S. Bradley, the director of the Climate System Research Center at the University of Massachusetts.''The logical conclusion is there is some role played'' by human affairs, added Dr. Bradley, whose studies of past climates were one of the yardsticks used to measure the reliability of the new work. There has been a slow shift toward this conclusion in the last few years. In April, for example, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the international group whose work has largely shaped the debate on the issue for a decade, circulated a draft of its next report on global warming, saying ''there has been a discernable human influence on global climate.''Scientists said the main value Dr. Crowley's study was his specific description of the limited role of natural forces in recent decades. In a separate commentary, also published in Science, Michael E. Mann, a climate expert at the University of Virginia and a research partner with Dr. Bradley, said the new work also indirectly confirms that computer models that predict a continuation of the warming in coming decades are reasonably reliable. The news cheered environmental officials at the White House who have backed action to control greenhouse gas emissions, particularly because diplomats will meet again this fall to debate ways to put into practice the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 agreement outlining a plan to cut such emissions. Dr. Neal Lane, a physicist who is the presidential science adviser, said in an interview that it was important not to overplay the study, which relied on a fairly simple computer model and estimated variations in the sun's power that were, at best, rough approximations. But the new study largely correlates with work by Dr. Mann and others that used different methods but reached similar conclusions.''Scientists will debate whether this is the smoking gun,'' Dr. Lane said. ''But it's clear that the changes we've seen in this century are unprecedented in the last thousand years. This argues for prudent action to stem the growth of greenhouse gases.''Critics of the global warming theory quickly took note of the work, but mainly to poke at its weaknesses. For example, Dr. S. Fred Singer, the president of Science & Environmental Policy Project, a private consulting group in Virginia, said Dr. Crowley had drawn precise conclusions from imprecise calculations. But other scientists defended Dr. Crowley's approach. The initial goal in the work, Dr. Crowley said, was to gain a better understanding of how natural influences were shaping past global temperatures, which have included a variety of shifts ranging from a medieval warming to a prolonged cooling from the 1600's to the 1800's that is called the Little Ice Age. Two of the most important factors are changes in the radiation flowing from the sun, which is thought to follow many complex cycles, and volcanoes, which temporarily cool the earth by lofting a veil of fine sulfate droplets that reflect sunlight. Dr. Crowley found that past variations in the radiance of the sun or bursts of volcanic activity, when fed into a computer model simulating the flow of energy to and from the earth, produced temperatures that match most of the ups and downs of the actual climate from the year 1000 to the mid 1800's. But that neat relationship among sunlight, eruptions and temperature broke down completely in the 20th century, he reported. The only ''forcing'' that remotely matched the jump in temperatures seen in the latter half of the century was the rise in emissions of greenhouse gases. Dr. Crowley himself noted that his model was rough; for example, he said, past solar variation is only indirectly recorded, partly in traces of elements found in old glacial ice that were made as radiation from the sun and other stars bombarded the atmosphere and partly in observations by Galileo and subsequent astronomers who charted sunspot activity from 1610 on. Even so, the good correlation between his work and other recent reconstructions of past climates prompted a variety of climate experts to say the study was valid. a big step forward. A separate study, to be published tomorrow in Geophysical Research Letters, an influential journal, largely echoes Dr. Crowley's assertion that human actions are dominating current climate shifts. But the second study cautions that other, natural factors could stall further warming. One of the authors of that report, Dr. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois, said it was particularly important for policy makers and the public not to assume that temperature trends would follow a smooth course. He said the relationship between the oceans and the atmosphere was so complex that alterations in it could easily cause temporary cool periods or other unpredictable -- and possibly abrupt -- changes that could create confusion and paralyze work to attack global warming.

Because he never served in Congress, Gov. George W. Bush does not have a voting record. But he acquired one yesterday with the selection of Richard B. Cheney as his running mate. Republicans were cheering the sound judgment and broad foreign policy experience that Mr. Cheney, a former secretary of defense and White House chief of staff, brings to the Republican ticket. But Democrats were eyeing the hard-line conservative votes that Mr. Cheney cast during a 10-year House career. From Vice President Al Gore's perspective, Mr. Cheney adds weight to the G.O.P. ticket, but he also opens up promising lanes of attack. Mr. Bush believes that his running mate brings a resume and a personality that will outweigh any ideological vulnerability. Indeed, Mr. Cheney's vaunted toughness comes wrapped in a genial, Nebraska-born, Wyoming-honed personal manner. His deep experience clearly allows Mr. Bush to argue that he has passed a threshold test for any presidential candidate by picking a partner who would make a plausible successor. On that score, Governor Bush did a much better job than his father did in 1988 by choosing Dan Quayle. Still, Mr. Cheney's competence cannot soften a stark legislative record. Several times in his Congressional career he got a 100 percent favorable rating from the American Conservative Union and zero from the liberal Americans for Democratic Action. He was consistently pro-life, and his opposition to abortion, even in cases of rape or incest, will help Mr. Gore argue that the Bush-Cheney ticket represents a threat to women's right to choose. Mr. Cheney also voted against gun control legislation that came his way, including a bill regulating cop-killer bullets that many other conservatives backed. Mr. Cheney's environmental views will also be a tempting target for Mr. Gore. Mr. Cheney was among the few who voted not to override President Reagan's veto of a Clean Water Act reauthorization in 1987. Then as now, he supported opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling, a talismanic issue among conservationists. He is also on record as opposing the Kyoto agreement on global warming, which Mr. Gore helped to negotiate, as a potential threat to America's national security. While Mr. Cheney never demonstrated the mean streak associated with Newt Gingrich conservatives, his selection indisputably pulls the Republican ticket to the right. This comes after several weeks when it appeared that Mr. Bush would pick a Northeasterner like Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania to put his party nearer the political center. Now it will be up to Mr. Bush himself to pull in the moderate voters he will need to carry swing states outside his Southern and Western base. That positioning exercise may not be easy, especially with Mr. Gore sniping away. A New York Times/CBS poll yesterday suggested that the public, which in February divided equally between ''conservative'' and ''moderate'' when asked to describe Mr. Bush's ideology, now increasingly regards the Texas governor as a conservative. Mr. Cheney's selection is sure to reinforce that impression. In the days ahead, Mr. Cheney will be marketed as someone who brings sound judgment and safe hands to the executive branch. That is a reasonable depiction. By virtue of experience and temperament, he does represent a responsible choice. But the voters will also be asked to factor ideology into their selection this fall. And Mr. Gore, waving a long list of House votes, will not allow Mr. Bush's picture of Dick Cheney to go unchallenged.

Preparing for renewed international negotiations on cutting levels of heat-trapping gases that may be warming the climate, the United States is proposing that countries get just as much credit for using forests and farmers' fields to sop up carbon dioxide, the chief warming gas, as they would for cutting emissions from smokestacks and tail pipes. Scientists have known for decades that trees and other plants absorb carbon dioxide as they grow and some soils do as well. In theory, pulling carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere would allow countries to emit some heat-trapping, or greenhouse, gases without adding to the overall problem. Clinton administration officials and some scientists said last night that incentives to plant trees and to farm in ways that lock away carbon were essential for stabilizing the climate. In addition, they said, bringing farmers and foresters into the battle is likely to be crucial if the Senate, which has so far firmly opposed ratifying any international climate treaty, is to change its view. But the position is being criticized by some private environmental groups, which have pressed to cut the burning of coal and oil, which  caused most of the carbon dioxide buildup in the first place. They point to uncertainties about how long plants and soils could continue to absorb carbon. And the proposal is at odds with the stance of the European Union which, given its relative lack of open land for tree-planting, would be at a disadvantage. The State Department laid out the United States' approach in documents filed last night with a United Nations office that is overseeing talks aimed at carrying out the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement aimed at averting any dangerous climate warming. Thirty-eight other industrialized countries were scheduled to file their proposals last night, as well. The Kyoto agreement has been signed by the United States and more than 100 other countries but has not yet been ratified, and many details remain to be ironed out, with two rounds of negotiations coming in September and again in November. If the agreement is ratified, the United States would commit itself to cutting its emissions of carbon dioxide by 2010 to 7 percent below the emissions in 1990. Given the growth in the economy and fuel use since 1990, administration officials say, the only way to come anywhere near that target is by adopting every possible strategy, including the agricultural approach. Vice President Al Gore was deeply involved in crafting the Kyoto treaty and any deadlock in talks would be a blow to him. On the other hand, although Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has said he believes global warming is a significant problem, he opposes ratification of the Kyoto Protocol, saying it would unfairly burden the United States. White House officials said Mr. Gore was being apprised of the proposed strategy. Michael Oppenheimer, chief scientist of Environmental Defense, a private group, said that whatever program finally emerges in the next rounds of talks, it must not allow any country to get too much credit for things it is already doing, like, for example, planting trees on land that was clearcut several years ago.''Done well, credit for forests and farming could help jumpstart a solution to the global warming problem,'' Dr. Oppenheimer said. ''Done poorly, it could undermine the credibility of the whole Kyoto agreement.''David B. Sandalow, the assistant secretary of state for oceans and environmental affairs, said the United States would not want any final climate plan to permit loopholes allowing clearcutting or other bad land practices to get credit. But, taking a position at odds with some environmental groups, he added that the country's position would be to try to get credit for most of the carbon dioxide being absorbed by the country's trees and crops -- about 300 million metric tons a year is the projection for that tally by 2010. That compares to the projected total emissions of more than 2.1 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide a year from industry, cars and other sources if current energy trends continue, he said. He added that keeping some focus on farming and trees would keep the cost of fighting global warming down. Estimates are that it will be much cheaper for a country to absorb pollution than to reduce the output of these gases.''We need strong incentives for parties to adopt practices that protect the atmosphere at low cost,'' Mr. Sandalow said last night. Canada, Russia, Australia and other countries with lots of forests and farming are all tending to align with the American position. Also, according to several Japanese news services, Japan last night submitted similar plans, anticipating a large role for tree planting. Its focus is probably not so much on current events but on an anticipated round of talks extending actions on global warming to the third world, where Japan and other rich countries could get credit for investing in forest projects. Some private environmental groups are vigorously opposing this approach. Jennifer Morgan, the director of the climate change campaign at the World Wildlife Fund, an international group, said that forests and soils are, at best, a temporary storehouse for carbon, and one that can be broken open by later changes in practices or by unforseen forces like wildfire, droughts, or insect infestations -- all of which could abruptly unlock millions of tons of banked carbon.''Soil can be a great absorber of carbon, but if you plow too deeply two years in a row you can release it all back into the air,'' she said. ''We need to find the most secure way of reaching these goals, and that is to focus on cutting emissions from things like power plants.''Last night, a White House official said that some environmental groups -- historically focused on cleaning pollution -- were being too inflexible on the issue. ''Carbon is carbon, right?'' said the official.

An influential expert on global warming who for nearly 20 years has pressed countries to cut emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases now says the emphasis on carbon dioxide may be misplaced. Instead, he and a team of scientists have concluded that the quickest way to slow warming is to cut other such greenhouse gases first. This strategy could help policy makers overcome a fundamental conflict in the debate over global warming: carbon dioxide, the main heat-trapping gas in the air, is an unavoidable byproduct of burning fossil fuels like coal and oil -- and combustion of fossil fuels is the foundation of industrial societies. The expert, Dr. James E. Hansen, and his colleagues conclude in a new analysis that the warming seen in recent decades has been caused mainly by other heat-trapping emissions -- methane, chlorofluorocarbons, black particles of diesel and coal soot and compounds that create the ozone in smog -- which are easier to control than carbon dioxide, with many of them already on the decline. The team, which reported its findings this week in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, found that the burning of fossil fuels, although substantially raising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere, also produces a pall of particle haze that reflects as much of the sun's energy back into space as the release of carbon dioxide has trapped in the air, Dr. Hansen said. The haze from combustion is likely to be cleaned up in coming years, removing its cooling sun-blocking effect, said Dr. Hansen, who is director of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies. And over the course of the century, he added, carbon dioxide levels will still have to be reduced to prevent further warming. Meanwhile, emissions of carbon dioxide from human activities may be decreasing; he said they shrank slightly in 1998 and 1999, even as the global economy grew. As a result, he said, the world may find it easier and less costly to slow climate change than he and other scientists had thought, at least in the short term.''The prospects for having a modest climate impact instead of a disastrous one are quite good, I think,'' Dr. Hansen said in an interview. Some climatologists greeted Dr. Hansen's new paper with dismay, saying they feared it would be misused by skeptics about global warming or by critics of a proposed treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, which would commit industrialized nations to big cuts in greenhouse gas emissions. Representatives of industries most vulnerable to restrictions on carbon dioxide welcomed the findings, saying they raised provocative questions about the need for vigorous action on the climate. The strong reaction is largely a function of the major role that Dr. Hansen has played in propelling the greenhouse debate onto the public stage. In 1981, he was a principal author of one of the first papers spelling out the links between rising atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide and rising global temperatures. In 1988, when a scorching American heat wave was at its peak and fires were consuming the Amazon, he testified before a Senate committee that human activities were changing the climate. In the analysis, Dr. Hansen and his colleagues culled data and scientific papers on topics from rice production, which releases methane, to urban pollution, a source of ozone and sooty particles, to obtain detailed estimates of the rate of change in different greenhouse emissions. He then used established formulas for calculating how different amounts of the gases in the future would affect the inflow of energy from the sun and escape of heat from the earth. Carbon dioxide is by far the most abundant greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. But the other gases Dr. Hansen and his team cite are more prodigious trappers of heat. Moreover, Dr. Hansen said, in contrast to the difficulties of controlling carbon dioxide, technologies already exist for capturing or eliminating many of the other kinds of emissions.''These are much more tractable,'' Dr. Hansen said, citing as an example existing systems for capturing methane produced by decomposing organic material in landfills. Also, because many of these gases cause serious, costly health problems or can harm agriculture, there are ''strong economic reasons for wanting to eliminate them,'' he said. Some scientists criticized aspects of the new study, but agreed that an initial focus on the other greenhouse gases could achieve significant slowing of climate warming, as long as carbon dioxide cuts were also made. Dr. John P. Holdren, a professor of environmental science and public policy at Harvard University, said any focus on cutting just one set of gases now would be a mistake. ''This is not an either-or problem,'' Dr. Holdren said. ''It's a both-and problem. We're going to need all the cuts we can get.''The paper has prompted a significant amount of scrambling by scientists and lobbyists who are trying to shape the response to global warming. Several hundred scientists in dozens of countries are working on final revisions to the latest installment of a United Nations assessment of climate change. It also comes as the presidential candidates are being pressed by private environmental groups to add more detail to their positions on global warming. Vice President Al Gore has frequently cited Dr. Hansen's work. In 1997, Mr. Gore played a major role in negotiations in Kyoto, Japan, on the proposed treaty. The White House said yesterday that the Kyoto plan was the best approach to slowing warming, adding that it placed equal emphasis on reducing all of the greenhouse gases largely because of insistence by American negotiators, including the vice president. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has said the Kyoto proposals were ''inadequate and unfair to the United States.'' A spokesman for the Bush campaign, Ray Sullivan, yesterday called the new Hansen paper intriguing, adding that there were still questions to be answered. Dr. Robert T. Watson, the chairman of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, said he had received a flurry of phone calls from other scientists in the last few days expressing worries that Dr. Hansen's study could be misportrayed.''They said this could easily be interpreted as the guy who got Vice President Gore all excited about global warming now saying everything's fine,'' Dr. Watson said, adding: ''If this paper is viewed that way, it'd be a horrible distortion. If anything, our projections for warming are higher than they used to be, and we're seeing discernible changes in ecosystems that we can link back to climate.''Representatives of industries that have sought to limit restrictions on fossil fuels said the paper poked provocative holes in the science behind the Kyoto plan and other proposals to stem warming. Dr. Hansen stressed that he is still convinced that global warming is under way, that people are a significant cause, and that work should be done to cut the rate of change -- perhaps not quite as much work as researchers thought.

Earlier this month, scientists spotted a patch of open ocean about a mile wide at the North Pole, where the ice is normally six to nine feet deep. This remarkable discovery followed close on the heels of a prediction from Norwegian scientists that the polar icecap could disappear, at least in summer, in 50 years. To most climatologists, the thinning of the sea ice is further proof of the warming of the earth's atmosphere, a potentially disruptive trend that hardly mainstream scientists now dispute. This is the sort of thing that Al Gore loves to talk about, but so far global warming has barely entered the presidential campaign. In fact, except for a three-day period when Mr. Gore talked about energy policy, environmental questions generally have been hidden behind big-ticket items like Social Security, taxes and national defense. But few issues are as vexing and contentious as those that touch on the relationship between people and nature -- issues like clean air, the degradation of the oceans and marine life, the preservation of open space and biodiversity, and climate change. The nation faces two broad environmental imperatives. The first is to continue the momentum of the last 30 years, a period when Congress moved legislatively to clean up the damage inflicted by the Industrial Revolution and to give environmental concerns equal weight with economic development. The second is to help the rest of the world grapple with problems that override national boundaries, like global warming and destruction of biodiversity. Domestically, the green revolution took wing under Richard Nixon, who presided over the creation of an astonishing body of environmental law. It accelerated under Jimmy Carter, and burst forward again under Bill Clinton, who is ending his term with a series of intricate regulatory moves designed to outfox a hostile Congress and add millions of acres of threatened wilderness to the public domain before he leaves office. But at no time could this progress be taken for granted. President Ronald Reagan's appointees did their best to thwart the will of Congress through inertia and lax enforcement. In 1995, the Gingrich Republicans came very close to rescinding some of the country's basic environmental protections. The attitude of the White House is decisive. Mr. Reagan's appointees undermined existing law because the president did not care. The Contract With America gang failed because Mr. Clinton did care. So it goes, throughout government. Whether the Army Corps of Engineers, which for decades loved to build dams and straighten out free-flowing rivers, serves or damages the environment depends on whom the president appoints as its civilian chief and whether he keeps an eye on it. Similarly, when the bureaucracy finally gets around to using its existing statutory authority to regulate industrial farmers who foul rivers with animal waste, it will be because some chief executive has ordered it to. The global issues are of course less amenable to Washington's influence, but these problems cannot begin to be solved without presidential involvement. Put simply, the less-developed world, including China, will not reduce emissions of the gases that contribute to global warming unless the industrialized nations do. The industrialized nations, meanwhile, cannot move forward without the active participation of the United States, the world's biggest producer of those gases. But Congress has refused to force industry to clean up emissions. Nor has it offered industry any incentives to do so.  Though Mr. Clinton helped negotiate the Kyoto agreement on global warming in 1997, he chose not to spend further political capital on the issue. So far, Mr. Gore has taken a more assertive approach than Gov. George W. Bush on all of these questions. Mr. Gore helped devise the administration's aggressive regulatory strategies under the clean air and water laws and fortified Mr. Clinton's resolve to oppose Republican efforts to weaken those laws. He can also be expected to continue Mr. Clinton's efforts to guard and expand the public lands. In Texas, Mr. Bush has pursued a cooperative approach emphasizing voluntary solutions to environmental problems, and has said that as president he would turn over ''significant'' authority to local governments. While he supports the federal Land and Water Conservation Fund, he has criticized important administration initiatives on wilderness protection and has promised to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration. Global warming, of course, is Mr. Gore's signature environmental issue, and he is likely to give it a kind of prominence that Mr. Clinton did not. He has also unveiled an ambitious and fairly detailed menu of subsidies and market incentives aimed at helping industry achieve dramatic reductions in greenhouse gases. Mr. Bush agrees that global warming is a problem, but so far he has given no details of what he would do about it. The candidates' positions on warming reflect the overall pattern of the campaign to date on environmental matters. Mr. Bush has expressed general concern for these issues, and on Friday singled out the preservation of tropical forests as a priority in his diplomacy with Latin America. But Mr. Gore has outlined more detailed remedies and conveyed a more muscular attitude about enforcement. CAMPAIGN 2000: ENVIRONMENT

That North Pole ice has turned liquid may be the least of our problems. New studies have found that all Northern Hemisphere sea ice is melting at a rate of about 15 percent per decade and that the oceans as a whole are warming. Moreover, researchers have just identified a rare manufacturing byproduct, SF5 CF3, that represents the most potent greenhouse gas ever detected. The signs of global warming keep accumulating. It's all so depressing; we must be doomed. Except that in the flood of distressing developments comes a breakthrough. A study led by James Hansen, the director of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, suggests that our basic understanding of greenhouse gases should be overturned -- and that reforms could be more practical and affordable than widely assumed. Until recently, scientists studying global warming focused nearly all their attention on the deleterious effects of carbon dioxide, which is known to trap atmospheric heat. Every year, cars, trucks and power plants release billions of tons of carbon dioxide by burning fossil fuels.  Some combination of advanced nuclear energy and clean renewable fuels may eventually change this; but for the next few decades, at least, continued buildup is inevitable. Even the ratification of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which would commit industrialized nations to cut greenhouse gas emissions, could not stop carbon dioxide buildup. If the treaty's rules went into effect (no major country has ratified it), rising carbon emissions from the developing world would outweigh any reductions in the West. Enter Mr. Hansen's team to suggest that focusing on carbon dioxide is a fundamental error. Carbon dioxide is a concern, the study says, but other factors may be equally significant. Black soot from industrial smoke, for example, may turn out to be a leading warming force. (Basically it makes the atmosphere soak up more of the sun's heat, since black absorbs sunlight.) Compounds like SF5 CF3 , may be doing more damage than expected. And most of all, methane, which has far more heat-trapping power than carbon dioxide, may be a much greater greenhouse malefactor than today's scientific models assume. Here is the beauty of Mr. Hansen's insight. While fossil fuels are an essential, much of the world's methane emissions have no economic utility; they are the unintended byproduct of natural-gas exploration, poor landfill management and gas-pipeline leaks. These sources could be eliminated with little sacrifice to our lifestyle or economic growth. Likewise, rare chemicals like SF5 CF3 , could be controlled without harm to industry. Black soot emissions have already nearly disappeared from Western industry without any economic harm. Today such soot comes mainly from the developing world, where choking smoke rises from unregulated industry and from unelectrified homes that use fires for cooking and heating. While regulating smokestack emissions and expanding access to electricity in developing nations would be an expensive undertaking, it would also be a huge boon. Public health as well as the environment would benefit. The World Health Organization says that more children in the developing world die each year from respiratory diseases caused by smoke and soot inhalation than all those who die each year in the United States and the European Union from  all causes at all ages. This breakthrough study of greenhouse gases comes from a guru of the environmental movement. In 1981, Mr. Hansen authored one of the first papers linking rising levels of carbon dioxide to rising global temperatures. Yet much of the environmental movement has greeted the new study with skepticism; many environmentalists worry that any lessening of fears regarding fossil fuels will hurt efforts to reduce global warming. Rather than grousing about the Hansen study, however, environmentalists should be extolling it as the greatest news in years. First, it revives hope for the Kyoto agreement -- which, at the insistence of State Department negotiators and Vice President Al Gore, contains a little-noticed clause saying that reductions in other greenhouse gas can be substituted for cuts in carbon dioxide. A Kyoto treaty that is fixated on reducing fossil fuel use may never be ratified, but one that goes after methane and SF5 CF3 , seems eminently practical, politically. Second, Mr. Hansen's study means that even if the Kyoto agreement is never ratified, affordable, realistic steps against global warming could start right away, without economic harm. A warming world need no longer be our destiny. Gregg Easterbrook, a senior editor at The New Republic, is the author, most recently, of Beside Still Waters.''

WHEN several eminent scientists returned recently from a tourist cruise to the North Pole aboard a Russian icebreaker and reported finding water, not ice, at the top of the world, the image resonated far and wide, providing a call to arms for scientists and environmentalists who for years had been trying to convince politicians and the public that heat-trapping gases from tail pipes, power plants, even methane-belching cattle, could disrupt the climate. But on second look, things were not nearly so simple. Although arctic experts said there were many signs of warming, including a thinning and shrinking of the polar ice cap, there was no way to link a patch of sun-dappled water at the pole to climate change. So the question of what is happening to climate -- and whether people or natural forces are to blame -- returned to the realm of nuanced, statistical fuzziness, where it has been for nearly 20 years. What a moment to lose potential clarion calls. Hundreds of negotiators from industrialized countries are to convene this week in Lyon, France, and again in late November in The Hague to try to firm up ways to cut emissions of greenhouse gases under a 1997 climate treaty called the Kyoto Protocol. The treaty was signed by the United States and 84 other countries but is in danger of falling apart because of disagreements over how to make and measure cuts. Most climate experts are certain that global warming is real and that it threatens ecology and human prosperity, and a growing number say it is well under way. But policy makers, always eager for black and white, have once again found science offering shades of gray. Indeed, global warming is a classic example of the persistent mismatch between the language of science and the needs of policy. Science operates by steadily chipping away at ideas through experiments or observations, eventually revealing truths, but often obliquely -- by eliminating what is not true. The bigger the idea, the harder it often is to verify with precision. The result is persistent debate, whether the issue is how to manage forests to reduce wildfires, how to set limits for chemicals in food to prevent cancer, or -- in this case -- how to figure out whether people are dangerously fiddling with the global thermostat. But before policy makers can try to sell potentially costly or difficult solutions, say, taxing fossil fuels, they need to build a clear and compelling case that strong action is called for. The lesson in all of this, according to climate scientists -- some of whom think humanity is already in big trouble -- is that no one should expect some alarm bell to start ringing to summon societies to take action. The evidence is subtle and complex, and probably  will be so for a long time to come, said Jerry D. Mahlman, who is retiring as director of the federal Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory in Princeton, N.J. ''This is going to be incremental forever,'' he said. Those increments continue to add up, he and other climate experts said. Past climate ups and downs mostly mesh well with natural variations in the brightness of the sun or the cooling effect of parasol-like plumes of particles spewed by big volcanoes. But the recent warming, according to several recent studies, only correlates well with one thing: the buildup of carbon dioxide, methane and the other greenhouse gases. Hints that warming is being caused by emissions from industry and other human activities have been extracted from air bubbles trapped in ancient ice, from variations in tree rings, from the quick retreat of alpine glaciers. Thermometers dropped deep in the ocean and in holes bored in permafrost show warming patterns that do not match up with natural influences like changes in the sun's brightness. STILL, the subtleties have allowed warming skeptics ample opportunity to challenge the idea. Some, like Richard S. Lindzen, a meteorologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, have built durable counterarguments, saying the links connecting the earth's oceans, air and ''cryosphere,'' its frozen places, are impossible to elucidate with sufficient confidence to predict much beyond next week's weather. In an interview, Dr. Lindzen acknowledged the arctic warming trend and slight global warming measured in the last century, but said it all is well within the realm of natural variation or measurement error -- and not yet within our power to understand.''This is a field that was in a primitive state when it assumed a policy importance a few years ago,'' Dr. Lindzen said. ''Suddenly we've declared thousands of people in a primitive field as world experts, and they're trying to have their day.'' And reports last week that boats had traversed the normally frozen Northwest Passage and northern rivers and lakes were freezing later and thawing earlier were countered with the response that this seeming meltdown could still be ascribed to natural wiggles in temperature or ocean currents. But most scientists, including some who work with Dr. Lindzen at M.I.T., say the balance of data has shifted firmly toward a conclusion that people, through their impact on the atmosphere, are influencing climate now and will have even more impact in coming years. Somehow, many experts say, if the threat is to be countered, societies will have to figure out a way to act in the face of gray uncertainty, to deal aggressively with a problem that lacks the attributes of a crisis. That is no easy task. Dr. Mahlman has pretty much given up on that hope, saying that many countries, including the United States, have essentially decided that the focus is going to be on painless, low-cost fixes like growing trees to sop up the most common greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide, and on adapting to coming warming instead of countering it.''We just don't want to face up to it,'' he said, adding that people do not want to change their lifestyle or the economy ''for the sake of avoiding future costs.''He and others stress that the real challenge with global warming and similar issues is that, by the time the impact becomes too clear to debate, it will be far too late to do anything about it.

At the latest round of international talks aimed at shaping a treaty on global warming, delegates from oil-producing countries insisted that any final accord include a commitment to compensate them if efforts to cut emissions of heat-trapping gases resulted in a drop in the use of oil. The position of Saudi Arabia and other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries at the two weeks of talks, which wound up last night in Lyon, France, was supported by many developing countries and by China. But it prompted strong criticism from other participants at the United Nation-sponsored talks, particularly because the move occurred against a backdrop of widespread protests and transportation disruptions in Europe over spiking oil prices.''It's pretty ironic that while OPEC is raising oil prices, they're here asking for compensation,'' Jennifer Morgan, who heads the climate change program of the World Wildlife Fund, said from Lyon in a telephone interview. The talks were aimed at resolving many differences among countries that have signed the Kyoto Protocol but have not yet ratified it. The 1997 treaty is aimed at cutting emissions from industrialized countries of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases to levels about 5 percent below 1990 levels. The overwhelming source of carbon dioxide is the burning of oil, coal and other fossil fuels. Since the first rounds of talks on a climate treaty -- in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 -- Saudi Arabia, Nigeria and other OPEC members have repeatedly pressed for compensation for countries that produce or sell oil and coal. Those countries have often used other tactics to stall progress, critics said, including making frequent objections over negotiating procedures that have stalled sessions. They continued such efforts in Lyon, participants said, despite fuel shortages and protests that disrupted taxicab and bus service for a few days at the peak of the conference. Some representatives of industrialized countries said they were determined to fight language that would provide payments to oil producers. OPEC members said they, too, were prepared to fight. Muhammad al-Sabban, head of the Saudi delegation and senior economic adviser to the Saudi Oil Ministry, said the movement toward a climate treaty was a clear sign that the world continued to accelerate its shift away from fossil fuels.''We are assuming that only for another 15 years, maximum, will we have oil as a big share of the energy mix,'' he said. ''We are very concerned about this.''For all its prosperity, he said, Saudi Arabia will still need help in developing new industries and job sources for its growing population. Mr. Sabban said a large coalition of developing countries was ready to reject the treaty language if industrialized nations rejected the idea of compensating countries whose economies were harmed.''I'm surprised to see that developed countries expect they can get away with the things they want without giving equal treatment to what we want,'' he said in a telephone interview. The dispute over whether oil-rich countries should be compensated if the world weans itself off petroleum was just one of many sharp splits among participants. The group focused on refining language in the proposed treaty before foreign ministers convene in November in The Hague to negotiate final points. Participants and observers from some environmental groups said some progress had been made on streamlining language so that ministers would have fewer points to negotiate. But strong divisions persist over how to damp the greenhouse effect, with the United States, Russia and other large forested countries pressing recently to receive credit not just for cutting emissions of gases, but also for sopping them up by growing more trees or changing farming methods in ways that pull carbon dioxide from the air. Europe has opposed that strategy, instead seeking firm commitments to reduce the output of gases from smokestacks and tailpipes. Other points of contention include proposed mechanisms through which wealthy countries could lead poor countries to avoid sharp rises in emissions as their economies grow, and ways to create a fair system to measure cuts and enforce an agreement. Over all, many negotiators and observers at the conference said in telephone interviews that they felt confident that a meaningful document would emerge by November.

A new study has cast doubts on an important element of a proposed treaty to fight global warming: the planting of new forests in an effort to sop up carbon dioxide, a heat-trapping gas. The research concludes that old, wild forests are far better than plantations of young trees at ridding the air of carbon dioxide, which is released when coal, oil and other fossil fuels are burned. The United States and other countries with large land masses want to use forest plantations to meet the goals of the proposed treaty. The study's authors say that any treaty also needs to protect old forests and that, so far there is no sign that such protections are being considered. Without such protections, the scientists conclude, some countries could be tempted to cut down old forests now and then plant new trees on the deforested land later, getting credit for reducing carbon dioxide when they have actually made matters worse. The analysis, published in the journal Science today, was done by Dr. Ernst-Detlef Schulze, the director of the Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry in Jena, Germany, and two other scientists at the institute. Several climate and forestry experts familiar with the work said the study provided an important new argument for protecting old-growth woods. And they say the study provides a reminder that the main goal should be to reduce carbon dioxide emissions at the source, smokestacks and tailpipes. In old forests, huge amounts of carbon taken from the air are locked away not only in the tree trunks and branches, but also deep in the soil, where the carbon can stay for many centuries, said Kevin R. Gurney, a research scientist at Colorado State University. When such a forest is cut, he said, almost all of that stored carbon is eventually returned to the air in the form of carbon dioxide.''It took a huge amount of time to get that carbon sequestered in those soils,'' he said, ''so if you release it, even if you plant again, it'll take equally long to get it back.''Negotiators are to meet in November to settle on methods for staving off a predicted warming that could disrupt ecosystems, harm agriculture and cause sea levels to rise, eroding coasts. The negotiations are taking place under the Kyoto Protocol, an agreement that was signed by more than 100 countries in 1997 but has not yet been ratified. It sets goals for cutting greenhouse gas emissions starting in 2008 but includes few details on how to achieve them. The United States, Canada, Russia and other countries have been pressing to achieve as much as half their greenhouse gas reductions not at the source but by using ''sinks'' like forests to remove carbon dioxide. In the last round of talks, which ended last week in Lyon, France, some countries were still seeking treaty language that could allow some new planting to occur on land that was recently cleared of old forest and get credit for greenhouse-gas reductions, said Mr. Gurney, who attended the talks as an observer. David B. Sandalow, an assistant secretary of state who was the chief American delegate in Lyon, said that the treaty drafts so far could theoretically allow such a practice but that the United States was seeking to prevent this.''We're committed to protecting old growth and finding ways to address this issue,'' Mr. Sandalow said. The German study, together with other similar research, has produced a picture of mature forests that differs sharply from long-held notions in forestry, Dr. Schulze said. He said aging forests were long perceived to be in a state of decay that releases as much carbon dioxide as it captures. But it turns out that the soils in undisturbed tropical rain forests, Siberian woods and some German national parks contain enormous amounts of carbon derived from fallen leaves, twigs and buried roots that can bind to soil particles and remain for 1,000 years or more. When such forests are cut, the trees' roots decay and soil is disrupted, releasing the carbon dioxide. Centuries would have to pass until newly planted trees built up such a reservoir underground. New forests are fine as long as they are planted on land that was previously vacant, Dr. Schulze said, adding, ''but there has to be a focus on preserving the old growth.''

With oil prices up, consumers agitated and the winter heating season looming, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are going at it on energy policy, seeking to draw sharp distinctions over an issue on which both candidates have political vulnerabilities. It is a topic that the two parties see as touching consumers every time they fill up at the pump or adjust their thermostats, and one that is inextricably linked to broader environmental, foreign policy and economic issues. Mr. Gore forced the topic back onto the campaign agenda last week with his call, acceded to by President Clinton, for the government to release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to head off shortages of home heating oil -- an action that both the president and the vice president had opposed earlier in the year. Mr. Bush, who criticized the decision as a political ploy to drive down prices just ahead of Election Day, is scheduled to discuss energy policy in a speech on Friday. The most basic question facing the country on energy is how to keep supply and demand in line. Mr. Bush, like most Republicans, emphasized finding new oil and ensuring a flow from other oil-producing nations. Mr. Gore, like many Democrats, focuses on trying to use less energy, or at least on using existing energy supplies as efficiently as possible.''In very simple terms, the Republicans would approach an energy problem from the supply side: 'What can we do to increase supply?' '' said Robert E. Ebel, director of the energy program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. ''The Democrats would say: ''What can we do to make better use of what we've got?' ''There are a number of other clearly defined differences between them. Mr. Gore sees global warming as a serious threat, and strongly backs an international agreement reached three years ago in Kyoto, Japan, which calls for substantial reductions in emissions of industrial gases from burning coal, oil, wood and natural gas. Mr. Bush acknowledges that global warming is a potential problem, but says the Kyoto agreement would be too costly to the United States and would not ensure that developing countries do their part. Mr. Bush, who worked for years in the oil industry and whose running mate, Dick Cheney, ran an oil field services company, supports opening some environmentally sensitive areas, including the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska, to oil exploration and production. Mr. Gore opposes such steps. Mr. Gore, who has long said he is willing to pay a political price for his environmental principles, has suggested that the United States needs to take drastic steps, like eliminating the internal combustion engine, a goal that is widely mocked by Republicans. In an effort to encourage conservation, Mr. Gore has also supported higher taxes on energy consumption, including a broad-based energy tax proposed by the Clinton administration in 1993 but never adopted, and a 4.3-cents-a-gallon increase in the federal gasoline tax, which became law in 1993 over the objection of every Republican in Congress. In some ways, the two candidates are not as far apart as they seem. For all his focus on reducing demand, Mr. Gore has supported limited expansion of domestic exploration and production, including in the Gulf of Mexico and on federal land. Mr. Bush backs policies that promote conservation and energy efficiency. Although Mr. Gore would rely more heavily on a government role than Mr. Bush, both candidates see the market as the most powerful force for addressing energy problems. Both generally support the deregulation of the electric power industry to allow power producers to compete in serving consumers. In their own way, both of them have had to manage balancing acts. Mr. Gore's general philosophy, and some of the specific positions he has taken over the years, are based in part on the idea that higher oil prices could be a good thing in holding down consumption and encouraging conservation and use of alternative energy sources. Yet Mr. Gore has also sought to portray himself as defender of the consumer against higher gasoline and heating costs. During the summer, he called for a federal investigation into whether oil companies were unfairly jacking up gasoline prices. And with winter looming and crude oil prices rising, he tried to pre-empt a possible spike in home heating oil prices with his call last week for release of supplies from the reserve.''Gore is right that there is vast potential for alternative technologies and fuels,'' said Pietro S. Nivola, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a liberal-leaning research organization. ''But every time we try to manipulate or depress the price of oil, we put off the day when some of these innovations come online.''Mr. Bush has said the surge in oil prices this year has resulted from  what he says is the Clinton-Gore administration's ineptitude in dealing with the oil-producing nations of the Middle East and on its failure to promote new oil production and modernization of power plants, pipelines and refineries at home. But his own close ties to the oil industry and problems with air quality in Texas have sometimes left him on the defensive, and his choice of Mr. Cheney as a running mate only exacerbated the problem. And while Mr. Bush's advisers say his criticism of Mr. Gore for tapping the nation's oil reserves makes the vice president look like a crass panderer, it is unclear whether voters will appreciate that kind of principle more than immediate action to help them deal with surging prices. Lawrence B. Lindsey, Mr. Bush's chief economic adviser, told reporters this week that energy was the ''best issue'' for the Texas governor in the campaign right now. Mr. Lindsey said Mr. Bush's policy prescriptions would center on promoting more domestic exploration and production of oil, speeding the process of granting permits for new refineries, power plants and pipelines, more active diplomatic efforts to persuade oil producing nations to keep oil prices stable and at reasonable levels and a greater emphasis on working with Western Hemisphere oil producers, especially Mexico. Mr. Bush would also work with industry to promote conservation and efficiency through innovations like time-of-day pricing, under which energy users would pay more at peak hours of demand, Mr. Lindsey said.''Eight years of neglect cannot be made up overnight,'' Mr. Lindsey said. ''It's going to take a lot of years of work on our part to rectify the problems that have accumulated.''In a series of speeches this year, Mr. Gore set out a list of energy initiatives. He relies heavily on tax credits -- for the purchase of fuel-efficient vehicles and homes, use of low-polluting fuels and solar power, investment by business in energy efficient equipment and for production of electricity from renewable and alternative fuel sources. But the core of his message is that developing efficiency-enhancing products and cleaner sources of energy is not an economic burden but an opportunity that can create jobs and profits for the United States. His plan, Mr. Gore said at a campaign stop in Pennsylvania last week, would ''create millions of new jobs by getting out in front of the market for these new boilers and new furnaces and new cars and trucks and buses and revamped power plants and new technologies that help us to conserve more energy.''What neither candidate is saying explicitly is that the best policy in the long run, according to some analysts, may be to promote prices that are substantially below the nearly $38 a barrel level that crude oil hit briefly last week before declining to around $30 today, but well above the $12 level that made gasoline so cheap two years ago. Mr. Clinton acknowledged as much this week. He told reporters on Wednesday that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries' target range of $22 to $28 a barrel was ''reasonable,'' but that he did not want to see prices ''go back down to $13 or $12 or $10 again because that was also disruptive.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE ENERGY ISSUE

Several Republican senators today expressed strong concerns that talks to flesh out details of a global-warming treaty signed by the administration in 1998 would never produce a document that the Senate would approve. The comments came as Frank E. Loy, undersecretary of state for global affairs, spoke at a joint hearing of the Senate Foreign Relations and Energy and Natural Resources Committees in which he defended efforts to transform the treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, from a broad commitment to stem global emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases into a detailed, enforceable plan. The protocol calls for the United States and other industrialized countries to start by 2008 reducing emissions of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, which comes mainly from burning coal and oil. More than 150 countries have signed the protocol, but it has not been ratified by any of the world's industrial powers. Negotiations will resume in November in The Hague on a variety of points, including defining ways for wealthy countries to get credit toward emissions targets by paying for projects in developing countries that help prevent releases of greenhouse gases as those economies grow. Senator Frank H. Murkowski, the Alaska Republican who is chairman of the energy committee, said important aspects of the treaty were far from the goals the Senate set in a resolution 1997, before the accord was adopted at a Kyoto meeting. It would still be an unfair burden on the American economy, Mr. Murkowski said, by forcing cuts in the use of coal and oil. And, he added, there appeared to be no requirement for developing countries to limit future emissions. That was a specific demand of in the Senate resolution, which passed on a 95-to-0 vote. Mr. Loy, the chief negotiator for the United States in recent rounds of climate talks, said the agreement was not, and would not -- even after further talks -- be a complete or perfect solution to global warming.  But, he said, it is an essential start, providing relatively cheap insurance against harm if scientists' predictions of the consequences of a warming climate prove correct. Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, said there were signs in his state that farmers would support a treaty if they got financial credits for sopping up carbon dioxide through certain farming methods.

A sharp new debate has sprung up among atmospheric scientists over where to aim efforts to stave off the prospect of global warming from the buildup of heat-trapping greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Some say the main target should be carbon dioxide, the most common greenhouse gas, while others say the most practical solution is to focus first on less common, but more powerful, substances possibly influencing climate, like methane, ozone and soot. The debate comes just as negotiators from more than 150 countries are preparing to head to The Hague next month to put flesh on the bones of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, a treaty outlining commitments by industrialized countries to reduce their greenhouse emissions and help poor countries avoid new emissions as their economies grow. The argument for attacking the less common greenhouse ingredients is mainly based on the idea that these substances contribute to harmful air pollution as well as climate change -- and so an easier case can be made to policy makers and the public to clean them up. They are also relatively easy to attack with existing or developing technologies, whereas carbon dioxide can still generally be reduced only by burning less fuel. Proponents of this strategy, most notably Dr. James E. Hansen, an influential NASA climate expert, say that cutting carbon dioxide, at least in the short term, is a far more daunting task because it is a basic byproduct of burning coal and oil. In other words it is a basic byproduct of almost every aspect of modern life. But there are problems with focusing on other heat-trapping substances, as well, other scientists say. Soot and the other greenhouse gases, they argue, constitute an extraordinarily complex brew whose influence on climate and interactions with each other and with clouds and other atmospheric ingredients are still poorly understood.''When you add in their chemical interactions, most scientists' eyes glaze over, it's so complicated,'' said Dr. Michael Oppenheimer, an atmospheric chemist who is chief scientist of Environmental Defense, a private conservation group. The debate was spurred last August, when Dr. Hansen and a team of his colleagues at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies, which is based in Manhattan, published ''Global Warming in the 21st Century: An Alternative Scenario,'' in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. In the paper, they said that deep cuts in carbon dioxide emissions were probably impossible in the short run, while the other gases and soot were already targets because of their contribution to old-fashioned pollution. In its conclusion, the team used a word rarely found in studies of global warming: ''optimistic.''The analysis has since been criticized by some longtime colleagues of Dr. Hansen and embraced by industry groups and elected officials who have long voiced doubt about the science behind climate change and the need for big cuts in fossil fuel use. Just last Thursday, for example, Dr. Hansen's findings were repeatedly cited by Republican senators holding a hearing questioning the need for the Kyoto Protocol, which has been signed by more than 100 countries but has yet to be ratified by any industrial powers. Many of the treaty's provisions focus on cutting carbon dioxide. Dr. Hansen's critics, including many influential experts on the atmosphere and climate, say that emissions of all of the gases should be curtailed wherever this is possible and not too expensive but that cutting carbon dioxide must still be a top priority. For his part, Dr. Hansen said that both sides in the debate had largely either misrepresented or misinterpreted his study. He said the fundamental goal was simply to find the most efficient -- and politically and economically palatable -- way to cleanse the atmosphere of human effluents that have the biggest impact on climate. He said he still hoped that once the dust settled, policy makers from all parts of the spectrum might find merit in the proposal.''I think it may be possible to get conservatives and liberals to agree on common-sense steps that slow down the climate experiment,'' Dr. Hansen said. The ''climate experiment'' to which he referred is a substantial rise in the amount of greenhouse gases released into the air by human activities since the start of the Industrial Revolution. So far, the insulating effect of these gases is the equivalent of turning on two one-watt Christmas tree light bulbs over each square yard of the earth's surface. That does not seem like much additional energy, Dr. Hansen said, but as a comparison he and others have calculated that the extra wattage accounting for the difference between the last ice age and current equable conditions is 6 to 9 watts per square yard. If greenhouse gas concentrations continue to rise, the human-caused increase in energy bathing the surface could exceed four watts per square yard, a rise that begins to approach the change from the last ice age until now. That is bound to jog climate, Dr. Hansen said. Dr. Hansen, besides being a respected climate scientist, is an inveterate pot stirrer who in the sweltering summer of 1988 told a Senate committee ''it is time to stop waffling'' about climate change, adding that signs had emerged that humans were causing some of the global warming measured in the 20th century. His new analysis is clearly intended to provoke his peers to re-examine assumptions made over the last 10 years, particularly by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a body of hundreds of scientists working together under the auspices of the United Nations to assess global warming and possible responses. Their first update in five years is due in January. Most atmospheric scientists have long recognized that more than a dozen greenhouse gases and various kinds of particles emitted by combustion and industry affect the flow of energy to and from the earth. (Most particles reflect sunlight like a parasol, cooling the planet; carbon soot tends to absorb energy and heat up.)But for the last decade, carbon dioxide has been the main target of climate experts and diplomats trying to stabilize climate. Its concentration in the atmosphere has risen by a third from levels seen before the Industrial Revolution; once added to the air, it takes many decades to disappear; and levels could double from pre-industrial amounts by the end of the new century, scientists project. Also important, it is relatively easy to measure the emissions and their sources and ''sinks,'' and processes that remove them from the air are fairly well understood. But Dr. Hansen noted that carbon dioxide emissions are not continuing their relentless climb at anywhere near the pace set in the last century, as fuels are used more efficiently and dirty ones, like coal, are supplanted by cleaner ones, like natural gas. Rather than seeking relatively costly additional cuts in carbon dioxide now, he said, the best return on an environmental investment in the short term would be to look at the other greenhouse culprits on his list. Then, later in the new century, when technologies have matured that offer sources of energy without new streams of carbon dioxide, the emphasis can shift back to that gas. Here is his thinking on the best targets for action now. First there is black carbon -- microscopic soot particles released from inefficient diesel engines, unfiltered power plants or burning forests. These tiny particles, besides harming lungs, absorb heat and also -- like other particles in the air -- form seeds for cloud droplets. They tend to make clouds darker, Dr. Hansen says, reducing clouds' tendency to reflect sunlight and make the earth's surface cooler. He said that if continuing efforts to reduce conventional pollution from fossil-fuel burning spread from wealthy countries to developing countries, the amount of this heat-trapping substance in the air would quickly drop. Methane is on most lists of priorities for reducing the greenhouse effect, and Dr. Hansen said it had, if anything, been underplayed as an important target. Methane comes both from natural sources like bogs and from a host of human sources, including coal mines, leaking pipelines, landfills, belching cattle and rice paddies. Dr. Hansen's study concluded that efforts to shift to rice-farming methods where fields are drained more frequently could cut releases. Also, his team pointed to Australian research showing that changing feeding patterns or mixing certain anti-gas additives in feed for tropical cattle cut by 40 percent their release of this gas without interfering with growth. With two billion cows, sheep, and goats belching away -- half of them in the tropics -- there is plenty of potential to cut into the greenhouse effect, he and supporters say. Finally, the Goddard analysis emphasizes the importance of reducing ozone, an evanescent gas that is not on the list of greenhouse gases considered under the Kyoto Protocol because it is not directly produced by human activities. Ozone, a poisonous molecule consisting of three oxygen atoms, is continually formed and destroyed when sunlight hits air, particularly when that air is laden with nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons, or other emissions from burning fuels or forests. This is the lung-searing brew called smog. Separately, ozone is formed high in the stratosphere, where it shields the planet from harmful radiation. Wherever it exists, it traps heat. Dr. Hansen said that as with carbon soot, as China, Mexico and other industrializing countries start to enact pollution controls to cut smog, they will also indirectly be lessening their greenhouse impact. But other scientists say the situation is not that clear-cut. One reason ozone has largely been left out of greenhouse equations so far is that its relationships with other greenhouse gases and other compounds in the air are almost impossibly complex. For example, extremely reactive hydroxyl radicals, OH, which are created as ozone encounters other compounds, destroy methane molecules. In essence, one greenhouse gas eats the other.''OH is the detergent of the atmosphere, scrubbing everything,'' said Dr. Monika Mayer, a research scientist in the climate program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She published a study last month in The Journal of Geophysical Research -- Atmospheres in which she and several colleagues concluded that future trends for ozone and methane would largely cancel each other out. Generally, she said, models show that although ozone should increase in cities, on average around the globe levels should drop, and this will allow methane to persist longer in the air because there will be fewer hydroxyl radicals there to destroy it. The effects of all of this on climate, she concluded in the paper, are likely to be a wash. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone, an atmospheric scientist and chancellor of the University of California at Irvine, said he agreed with Dr. Hansen that the complexity of chemistry in the atmosphere should not deter efforts to cut ozone, methane and other substances that contribute both to pollution and climate problems. He pointed to recent work showing that although levels of ozone and nitrogen oxides, which help create ozone, have been dropping over the United States and western Europe, they are relentlessly rising elsewhere. One study, Dr. Cicerone said, showed that nitrogen oxide concentrations in China, South Korea, Taiwan and Japan rose 60 percent from 1997 to 1998. There is plenty of concrete benefit to be gained, with little of the potential pain that might come from putting the same effort into reducing carbon dioxide emissions. But other scientists fear that any shift away from reducing burning of coal and oil would only impede long-term progress toward limiting the human influence on climate.''The most important thing is to stabilize all these emissions,'' said Dr. Thomas P. Ackerman, chief scientist in the Energy Department's atmospheric radiation measurement program in Richland, Wash. ''And there's no way you're going to do that without attacking the fossil-fuel problem. We're a society that likes to have simple solutions, but there are no easy answers here.''For his part, Dr. Hansen seems satisfied simply to have nudged the climate debate toward considering partial, common-sense solutions that he feels have been neglected. He added that one way to spur interest would be to illustrate the other harmful qualities of the greenhouse ingredients on his list up close and personal. Maybe, he said, it would make sense to ''lock people in a room with a good bit of ozone and black carbon in the air until they come up with some positive ideas.''Correction:  October 4, 2000, Wednesday  An article in Science Times yesterday about efforts to stave off global warming misstated the period in which emissions of nitrogen oxides from four Asian countries rose 60 percent. It was 1987 to 1998, not 1997 to 1998. Correction: October 4, 2000, WednesdayAn article in Science Times yesterday about efforts to stave off global warming misstated the period in which emissions of nitrogen oxides from four Asian countries rose 60 percent. It was 1987 to 1998, not 1997 to 1998.<br><br>

INTERNATIONALA3-14Peace Talks Are Shelved As Mideast Death Toll Rises  Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel said peace talks were now ''on the shelf'' and Yasir Arafat called for an emergency Arab summit meeting, as violence tore through Israel and the Palestinian territories for the fifth straight day, leaving at least 15 dead and scores more severely wounded. President Clinton and other foreign leaders called for a halt to the violence and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said she would meet with Mr. Barak and Mr. Arafat in Paris on Wednesday. A1Milosevic Denounces Opponent  President Slobodan Milosevic went on Yugoslav national television to implore citizens to re-elect him in a runoff and reject efforts by what he called a traitorous opposition to organize a general strike. His challenger, Vojislav Kostunica, who says he won the presidency outright in elections on Sept. 24, reiterated to striking miners that he would not participate in a second round. A1Russia Bolsters Tajik Border  Russia is laying antipersonnel mines and reinforcing positions along the border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan. Taliban fighters have moved within artillery range of the Russian Army, which protects the gateway to Central Asia, but a senior Russian official said Moscow did not expect an attack. A12The worst drought in 50 years has followed a decade of industrial collapse and civil war and threatens half of Tajikistan's population. A3U.S. Rebuffed on U.N. Dues  The European Union rebuffed an American request to have Washington's dues to the United Nations lowered, as a review began of each country's contributions. A12Hurricane Batters Caribbean  Hurricane Keith tore up buildings and caused flooding throughout Central America and Mexico, causing at least three deaths. The storm swirled just off the coast of Belize and was drifiting north.(AP)World BriefingA11FASHIONB11OBITUARIESB10Reggie Kray  The last survivor of the three-brother gang of ruthless enforcers who ran London's underworld in the 1950's and 1960's was 66. B10NATIONALA16-25Poll Finds Both Candidates Faring Well on Leadership  A New York Times/CBS News Poll shows that most Americans regard Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore as strong leaders, but they consider Mr. Gore far more prepared for the White House and better qualified to deal with world leaders and members of both parties in Congress. But when voters are asked to assess each man on the broader question of his potential to be ''an effective president,'' both candidates receive high marks. The poll also found that Mr. Bush's personal popularity had eroded slightly as Mr. Gore's continued to improve. In terms of voter preferences, Mr. Gore held a narrow lead over Mr. Bush. A1While Mr. Gore is leading in California, Mr. Bush is far outpacing him in contributions in Silicon Valley. A1On the day before their first debate, Mr. Bush campaigned in West Virginia and Mr. Gore was sequestered with advisers in Florida. A23Dick Cheney and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman prepared for their debate on Thursday. A24An independent analysis of the Bush and Gore tax proposals. A23Senate Fight Over River Wildlife  The Senate, ignoring the threat of a veto and voting 57 to 37, approved a measure barring the Army Corps of Engineers from altering the Missouri River's flow to protect two birds and a fish, the piping plover, the least tern and the pallid sturgeon. A1Execution Delayed in Texas  A state judge delayed the execution of Stacey Lawton, convicted of murdering a man in 1992, because his court-appointed lawyer had missed the deadline for filing a clemency petition on his behalf. A16New Efficiency Standards  Central air-conditioning and heat pumps would have to do the same amount of work on 20 to 30 percent less electricity under standards to be proposed today by the Energy Department. They are part of an effort to reduce consumption by appliances to cut air pollution, fuel use and strain on the electric system. A16EDUCATIONNew Strategy Against Drinking  Colleges across the country say a new tactic to discourage binge drinking -- simply saying students don't drink so much, after all -- has surprised many by producing notable declines in the number of students who say they drink heavily. A1NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8State Monitors Fault Nassau Financial Plan  A state board monitoring Nassau County's fiscal crisis said the county executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, had failed to balance the budget in his new four-year rescue plan. The report urged county officials to devise a sound proposal by the end of the month or face a state takeover. B1A Car and Its Owner Reunited  Pavel Grinberg, who lost his car 19 months ago in the first criminal case resulting from a citywide crackdown on drunken driving, got his car back, though the case was dropped in January. The Acura had to be towed home because its engine was dead. B3Church Embezzlement Inquiry  Queens investigators said some questions might never be answered about sizable sums reported missing at Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Church in Forest Hills, including precisely how much was missing and how many people were involved. B3ARTSE1-8SCIENCE TIMESF1-12New Debate on Warming  A sharp new debate has sprung up among atmospheric scientists over where to focus efforts against global warming: carbon dioxide, the most common greenhouse gas, or less common but more powerful substances, like methane, ozone and soot. The debate comes as international negotiators prepare for talks on the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, a treaty governing greenhouse emissions. F1  Digging Into Syria  A 4,300-year-old tomb excavated this summer is the oldest unplundered elite tomb to be found in Syria, its American-Dutch discovery team said, and promises new insights into a little-known urban culture. F1Ravenous Threat to Fisheries  Swarms of jellyfish consumed so many fish eggs and larvae in the Gulf of Mexico this summer that some scientists are talking about the potential for serious future threats to commercial and recreational fisheries in the northern Gulf. F2Nothing to Cheer About  Some experts worry that cheerleading has become nearly as dangerous as the sports the cheerleaders root for. The most recent estimate showed 21,096 injuries associated with cheerleading last year. F8Health & FitnessF7BUSINESS DAYC1-28Hearing on Music Industry Suit  A federal appeals court in San Francisco heard arguments on whether to reinstate a lower-court injunction, pending trial, barring the online music service Napster from facilitating exchanges of copyrighted music. C1Profit Warning From Xerox  Xerox, citing lower sales at a time of rising costs, warned after the close that it would report a third-quarter loss of 15 to 20 cents a share. C22-Year Manufacturing Low  Manufacturing fell in September for the second straight month, a sign that higher borrowing and energy costs caused factory cutbacks. C10New Encryption Standard  The Commerce Department chose the Rijndael encryption technique, developed by two Belgian computer scientists, as the new standard for protecting sensitive information on government computers and for computers of organizations doing business with the government. C12Business DigestC1World BusinessW1-10SPORTSD1-8Baseball Playoffs Begin  The Yankees play the A's at Oakland today, the Seattle Mariners play the White Sox in Chicago and the Atlanta Braves face the Cardinals in St. Louis. The Mets face the Giants tomorrow in San Francisco. D1EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: Conflagration in the Middle East; Congressional dos and don'ts; playoff time.  Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins. CrosswordE6  TV ListingsE7  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8

Following is a transcript of the presidential debate last night in Winston-Salem, N.C., between Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, as recorded by The New York Times. The moderator was Jim Lehrer of PBS.MR. LEHRER -- Good evening from Wake Chapel at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C. I'm Jim Lehrer of The NewsHour on PBS.Welcome to this second Election 2000 debate between the Republican candidate for president, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and the Democratic candidate, Vice President Al Gore. These debates are sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. The format and the rules are those negotiated by representatives of the two campaigns. Only the subjects tonight and the questions are mine. The format tonight is that of a conversation. The only prevailing rule is that no single response can ever, ever exceed two minutes. The prevailing rule for the audience here in the hall is, as always, absolute quiet, please. Good evening Governor Bush, Vice President Gore. At the end of our 90 minutes last week in Boston, the total time each of you took was virtually the same. Let's see if we can do the same tonight, or come close. Governor Bush, the first question goes to you. One of you is about to be elected the leader of the single most powerful nation in the world, economically, financially, militarily, diplomatically, you name it. Have you formed any guiding principles for exercising this enormous power? MR. BUSH -- I have. The first question is what's in the best interests of the United States. What's in the best interests of our people? When it comes to foreign policy, that'll be my guiding question. Is it in our nation's interests? Peace in the Middle East is in our nation's interests. Having a hemisphere that is free for trade and peaceful is in our nation's interests. Strong relations in Europe is in our nation's interests. I've thought a lot about what it means to be the president. I also understand that an administration is not one person, but an administration is dedicated citizens who are called by the president to serve the country, to serve a cause greater than self. And so I've thought about an administration of people who represent all America, but people who understand my compassionate and conservative philosophy. I haven't started naming names except for one person, and that's Mr. Richard Cheney, who I thought did a great job the other night. He's a vice-presidential nominee who represents, who, I think people got to see why I picked him. He's a man of solid judgment and he's going to be a person to stand by my side. One of the things I've done in Texas is I've been able to put together a good team of people. I've been able to set clear goals. The goals ought to be an education system that leaves no child behind, Medicare for our seniors, a Social Security system that's safe and secure, foreign policy that's in our nation's interest, and a strong military, and then bring people together to achieve those goals. That's what a chief executive officer does. So I've thought long and hard about the honor and -- of being the president of the United States. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. GORE -- Yes, Jim, I've thought a lot about that particular question and I see our greatest natural -- national strength coming from what we stand for in the world. I see it as a question of values. It is a great tribute to our founders that 224 years later this nation is now looked to by the peoples on every other continent and the peoples from every part of this earth as a kind of model for what their future could be. And I don't think that's just the kind of exaggeration that we take pride in as Americans; it's really true. Even the ones that sometimes shake their fists at us, as soon as they have a change that allows the people to speak freely, they're wanting to develop some kind of blueprint that will help them be like us more: freedom, free markets, political freedom. So I think first and foremost our power ought to be wielded to -- in ways that form a more perfect union. The power of example is America's greatest power in the world. And that means, for example, standing up for human rights. It means addressing the problems of injustice and inequity along lines of race and ethnicity here at home, because in all these other places around the world where they're having these terrible problems, when they feel hope it is often because they see in us a reflection of their potential. So we've got to enforce our civil rights laws. We've got to deal with things like racial profiling. And we have to keep our military strong. We have the strongest military. And I'll do whatever is necessary, if I'm president, to make sure that it stays that way. But our real power comes, I think, from our values. MR. LEHRER -- Should the people of the world look at the United States, governor, and say should they fear us, should they welcome our involvement, should they see us as a friend, everybody in the world? How do you -- how would you project us around the world as president? MR. BUSH -- Well, I think they ought to look at us as a country that understands freedom, where it doesn't matter who you are or how you're raised or where you're from that you can succeed. I don't think they ought to look at us with envy. It really depends upon how our nation conducts itself in foreign policy. If we're an arrogant nation, they'll resent us. If we're a humble nation, but strong, they'll welcome us. And our nation stands alone right now in the world in terms of power. And that's why we've got to be humble and yet project strength in a way that promotes freedom. So I don't think they ought to look at us in any way other than what we are. We're a freedom-loving nation. And if we're an arrogant nation, they'll view us that way, but if we're humble nation, they'll respect us. MR. LEHRER -- A humble nation? MR. GORE -- I agree with that. I think that one of the problems that we have faced in the world is that we are so much more powerful than any single nation has been in relationship to the rest of the world than at any time in history, that I know about anyway, that there is some resentment of U.S. power. So I think that the idea of humility is an important one. But I think that we also have to have a sense of mission in the world. And we have to protect our capacity to push forward what America's all about. That means not only military strength and our values. It also means keeping our economy strong. You know, in the last -- two decades ago, it was routine for leaders of foreign countries to come over here and say, 'You guys have got to do something about these horrendous deficits because it's causing tremendous problems for the rest of the world.' And we were lectured to all the time. The fact that we have the strongest economy in history today is not good enough -- we need to do more. But the fact that it is so strong enables us to project the power for good that America can represent. MR. LEHRER -- Does that give us -- does our wealth, our good economy, our power bring with it special obligations to the rest of the world? MR. BUSH -- Yes it does. Take for example, third world debt. I think we ought to be forgiving third world debt under certain conditions. I think, for example, if we're convinced that a third world country that's got a lot of debt would reform itself, that the money wouldn't go into the hands of a few, but would go to help people, then I think it'd make sense for us to use our wealth in that way. Or to trade debt for valuable rain forest lands, makes eminent sense. Yes, we do have an obligation in the world, but we can't be all things to all people. We can help build coalitions, but we can't put our troops all around the world. We can lend money, but we've got to do it wisely. We shouldn't be lending money to corrupt officials. So we've got to be guarded in our generosity. MR. LEHRER -- Let's go through some of the specifics now. New question, Vice President Gore. The governor mentioned the Middle East. Here we're talking at this stage in the game about diplomatic power that we have. What do you think the United States should do right now to resolve that conflict over there? MR. GORE -- The first priority has to be on ending the violence, dampening down the tensions that have arisen there. We need to call upon Syria to release the three Israeli soldiers who have been captured. We need to insist that Arafat send out instructions to halt some of the provocative acts of violence that have been going on. I think that we also have to keep a weather eye toward Saddam Hussein because he's taking advantage of this situation to once again make threats and he needs to understand that he's not only dealing with Israel, he is dealing with us, if he is making the kind of threats that he's talking about there. The use of diplomacy in this situation has already -- well, it goes hour by hour and day by day now. It's a very tense situation there. But in the last 24 hours, there has been some subsiding of the violence there. It's too much to hope that this is going to continue, but I do hope that it will continue. Our country has been very active with regular conversations with the leaders there. And we just have to take it day to day right now. But one thing I would say where diplomacy is concerned. Israel should, should feel absolutely secure about one thing. Our bonds with Israel are larger than agreements or disagreements on some details of diplomatic initiatives. They are historic, they are strong and they are enduring. And our ability to serve as an honest broker is something that we need to shepherd. MR. LEHRER -- Governor? MR. BUSH -- Well, I think during the campaign, particularly now during this difficult period, we ought to be speaking with one voice. And I appreciate the way the administration has worked hard to calm the tensions. Like the vice president, I call on Chairman Arafat to have his people pull back to make the peace. I think credibility is going to be very important in the future in the Middle East. I want everybody to know, should I be the president, Israel's going to be our friend. I'm going to stand by Israel. Secondly, that I think it's important to reach out to moderate Arab nations, like Jordan and Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. It's important to be friends with people when you don't need each other so that when you do there's a strong bond of friendship. And that's going to be particular important in dealing not only with situations such as now occurring in Israel, but with Saddam Hussein. The coalition against Saddam has fallen apart or it's unraveling, let's put it that way. The sanctions are being violated. There's -- we don't know whether he's developing weapons of mass destruction. He better not be or there's going to be a consequence, should I be the president. But it's important to have credibility and credibility is formed by being strong with your friends and resolute in your determination. It's one of the reasons why I think it's important for this nation to develop an antiballistic missile system that we can share with our allies in the Middle East, if need be, to keep the peace. To be able to say to the Saddam Husseins of the world or the Iranians, don't dare threaten our friends. It's also important to keep a strong ties in the Middle East with credible ties because of the energy crisis we're now in. After all, all the energy is produced from the Middle East. And so I appreciate what the administration is doing. I hope to get a sense of, should I be fortunate enough to be the president, how my administration will react to the Middle East. MR. LEHRER -- So you don't believe, Vice President Gore, that we should take sides in this and resolve this right now? A lot of people are pushing -- hey, we, the United States, should declare itself and not be so neutral in this particular situation. MR. GORE -- Well, we stand with Israel. But we have maintained the ability to serve as an honest broker. And one of the reasons that's important is that Israel cannot have direct dialogue with some of the people on the other side of conflicts, especially during times of tension, unless that dialogue comes through us. And if we throw away that ability to serve as an honest broker then we have thrown -- we will have thrown away a strategic asset that's important not only to us but also to Israel. MR. LEHRER -- Do you agree with that, governor? MR. BUSH -- I do. I do think this, though: I think that when it comes to timetables, it can't be a United States timetable as to how the discussions take place. It's got to be a timetable that all parties can agree to, other -- you know, like the Palestinians or the Israelis. Secondly, any lasting peace is going to have to be a peace that's good for both sides. And therefore the term honest broker makes sense. Whether -- This current administration has worked hard to keep the parties at the table. I will try to do the same thing. But it won't be on my timetable. It'll be on the timetable that people are comfortable with in the Middle East. MR. LEHRER -- People watching here tonight are very interested in Middle East policy. And they're so interested that they want to make a -- they want to base their vote on differences between the two of you -- as president, how you would handle Middle East policy. Is there any difference? MR. GORE -- I haven't heard a big difference right, in the last few exchanges. MR. BUSH -- Well I think, it's hard to tell. I think that, you know, I would hope to be able to convince people I could handle the Iraqi situation better. I mean --MR. LEHRER -- Saddam Hussein, you mean? MR. BUSH -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- You could get him out of there? MR. BUSH -- I'd like to, of course. And I presume this administration would as well. But we don't know, there's no inspectors now in Iraq. The coalition that was in place isn't as strong as it used to be. He is a danger. We don't want him fishing in troubled waters in the Middle East. And it's going to be hard, it's going to be important to rebuild that coalition to keep the pressure on him. MR. LEHRER -- You feel that is a failure of the Clinton Administration? MR. BUSH -- I do. MR. LEHRER -- Mr. Vice President? MR. GORE -- Well, when I got to be a part of the current administration it was right after I was one of the few members of my political party to support former President Bush in the Persian Gulf war resolution. And at the end of that war, for whatever reasons, it was not finished in a way that removed Saddam Hussein from power. I know there are all kinds of circumstances and explanations. But the fact is that that's the situation that was left when I got there. And we have maintained the sanctions. Now I want to go further. I want to give robust support to the groups that are trying to overthrow Saddam Hussein. And I know there are allegations that they're too weak to do it. But that's what they said about the forces that were opposing Milosevic in Serbia. And you know, the policy of enforcing sanctions against Serbia has just resulted in a spectacular victory for democracy just in the past week. And it seems to me that having taken so long to see the sanctions work there building upon the policy of containment that was successful over a much longer period of time against the former Soviet Union in the Communist bloc, it seems a little early to declare that we should give up on the sanctions. I know the governor's not necessarily saying that, but you know, all of these flights that have come in, all of them have been in accordance with the sanctions regime, I'm told, except for three, where they notified. And they're trying to break out of the box, there's no question about it. I don't think they should be allowed to. MR. LEHRER -- Did he state your position correctly? You're not calling for eliminating the sanctions, are you? MR. BUSH -- No, of course not. Absolutely not. I want them to be tougher. MR. LEHRER -- Let's go onto Milosevic and Yugoslavia, and it falls under the area of our military power. Governor, new question. Should the fall of Milosevic be seen as a triumph for U.S. military intervention? MR. BUSH -- I think it's a triumph. I thought the president made the right decision in joining NATO in bombing Serbia. I supported him when they did so. I called upon the Congress not to hamstring the administration and, in terms of forcing troop withdrawals on a timetable that wasn't in necessarily our best interests, or fit our nation's strategy, and so I think it's good public policy. I think it worked. And I'm pleased I made the decision I made, and I'm pleased the president made the decision he made, because freedom took hold in that part of the world, and, there's a lot of work left to be done, however. MR. LEHRER -- But you think it would not have happened -- do you think that Milosevic would not have fallen if the United States and NATO had not intervened militarily? Is this a legitimate use of our military power? MR. BUSH -- Yes, I think it is. Absolutely. I don't think he would have fallen had we not usen force. And I know there's some in my party that disagreed with that sentiment. But I supported the president. I thought he made the right decision to do so. I didn't think he necessarily made the right decision to take land troops off the table right before we committed ourselves offensively. But nevertheless it worked. The administration deserves credit for having made it work. It's important for NATO to have to work. It's important for NATO to be strong and confident to help keep the peace in Europe. And one of the reasons I felt so strongly that the United States needed to participate was because of our relations with NATO. And NATO's going to be an important part of keeping the peace in the future. Now, there's more work to do. It remains to be seen how whether or not there's going to be a political settlement to Kosovo. And I certainly hope there is one. I've -- also on record as saying, at some point in time, I hope our European friends become the peacekeepers in Bosnia and in the Balkans. I hope that they put the troops on the ground so that we can withdraw our troops and focus our military on fighting and winning war. MR. LEHRER -- Mr. Vice President. MR. GORE -- Well, I've been kind of a hard-liner on this issue for more than eight years. When I was in the Senate, before I became vice president, I was pushing for stronger action against Milosevic. He caused the deaths of so many people. He was the last Communist Party boss there and then he became a dictator that by some other label he was still essentially a Communist dictator. And unfortunately now he is trying to reassert himself in Serbian politics. Already, just today, the members of his political party said that they were going to ignore the orders of the new president of Serbia and that they questioned his legitimacy. And he's still going to try to be actively involved. He is an indicted war criminal. He should be held accountable. Now, I did want to pick up on one of the statements earlier. And maybe I have heard  the previous statements wrong, governor. In some of the discussions we've had about when it's appropriate for the U.S. to use force around the world, at times the standards that you've laid down have given me the impression that if it's something like a genocide taking place or what they called ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, that that alone would not be be the kind of situation that would cause you to think that the U.S. ought to, to get involved with, with troops. Now, there have to be other factors involved for me to want to be involved. But by itself, that, to me, can bring into play a fundamental American strategic interest because I think it's based on our values. Now, have I got that wrong? MR. LEHRER -- Governor? MR. BUSH -- O.K., yeah. I'm trying to figure out who the questioner was. MR. GORE -- I'm --MR. BUSH -- If I think it's in our nation's strategic interests, I'll commit troops. I thought it was in our strategic interests to keep Milosevic in check because of our relations in NATO, and that's why I took the position I took. I think it's important for NATO to be strong and confident. I felt like an unchecked Milosevic would harm NATO and so it depends on the situation, Mr. Vice President. MR. LEHRER -- Well, let's stay on the subject for a moment. New question related to this. There have been -- I figured this out -- in the last 20 years, there have been eight major actions involving the introduction of U.S. ground, air or naval forces. Let me name them: Lebanon, Grenada, Panama, the Persian Gulf, Somalia, Bosnia, Haiti, Kosovo. If you had been president, would any of those interventions not have happened? MR. GORE -- Can you run through the list again? MR. LEHRER -- Sure. Lebanon? MR. GORE -- I thought that was a mistake. MR. LEHRER -- Grenada? MR. GORE -- I supported that. MR. LEHRER -- Panama? MR. GORE -- I supported that one. MR. LEHRER -- Persian Gulf? MR. GORE -- Yes, I voted for it, supported it. MR. LEHRER -- Somalia? MR. GORE -- Well, of course, in that, again -- no, I think that that was ill considered. I did support it at the time. It was in the previous administration, in the Bush-Quayle administration, and I think in retrospect the lessons there are ones that we, that we should take, take very, very seriously. MR. LEHRER -- Bosnia. MR. GORE -- Oh, yes. MR. LEHRER -- Haiti? MR. GORE -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- And then Kosovo, we talked about that. MR. GORE -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- Want me to do it with you? MR. BUSH -- . . .MR. LEHRER -- You want to -- Lebanon? MR. BUSH -- No, I'm fine, I'll maybe make a couple comments. MR. LEHRER -- Sure, absolutely. MR. BUSH -- Somalia. It started off as a humanitarian mission then changed into a nation-building mission and that's where the mission went wrong. The mission was changed. And as a result, our nation paid a price, and so I don't think our troops ought to be used for what's called nation building. I think our troops ought to be used to fight and win war. I think our troops ought to be used to help overthrow a dictator when it's in our best interests. But in this case, it was a nation-building exercise. And same with Haiti. I wouldn't have supported either. MR. LEHRER -- What about Lebanon? MR. BUSH -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- Grenada? MR. BUSH -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- Panama? MR. BUSH -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- Obviously, the Persian --MR. BUSH -- With some of them I've got a conflict of interest on, if you know what I mean. MR. LEHRER -- I do, I do. You're -- the Persian Gulf, obviously. MR. BUSH -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- And Bosnia and you've already talked about Kosovo. But the reverse side of the question, governor, that Vice President Gore mentioned, for instance, 600,000 people died in Rwanda in 1994. There was no U.S. intervention, there was no intervention from the outside world. Was that a mistake not to intervene? MR. BUSH -- I think the administration did the right thing in that case. I do. It was a horrible situation. No one liked to see it on our TV screens, but it's a case where we need to make sure we've got a, kind of an early warning system in place in places where there could be a ethnic cleansing and genocide the way we saw it there in Rwanda. And that's a case were we need to use our influence to have countries in Africa come together and help deal with the situation. The administration, it seems like we're having a great love fest tonight, but the administration made the right decision on training Nigerian troops for situations just such as this in Rwanda. And so I thought they made the right decision not to send U.S. troops into Rwanda. MR. LEHRER -- Do you have any second thoughts on that based on what you said a moment ago about genocide and --MR. GORE -- I'd like to come back to the question of nation building, but let me address this question directly first. MR. LEHRER -- We'll do that --MR. GORE -- Fine. We did actually send troops into Rwanda to help with the humanitarian relief measures. My wife, Tipper, who's here, actually went on a military plane with General Shalikasvili on one of those flights. But I think in retrospect, we were too late getting in there. We could have saved more lives if we had acted earlier. But I do not think that it was an example of a conflict where we should have put our troops in to try to separate the parties for this reason, Jim. One of the criteria that I think is important in deciding when and if we should ever get involved around the world is whether or not -- if our national security interest is involved, if we can really make the difference with military force, if we've tried everything else, if we have allies. In the Balkans we had allies, NATO, ready, willing and able to go and carry a big part of the burden. In Africa we did not. Now we have tried -- our country's tried to create an Africa crisis response team there and we've met some resistance. We have had some luck with Nigeria but in Sierra Leone. And that, now that Nigeria's become a democracy, and we hope it stays that way, then maybe we can build on that. But because we had no allies and because it was very unclear that we could actually accomplish what we would want to accomplish by putting military forces there, I think it was the right thing not to jump in, as heartbreaking as it was. But I think we should have come in much quicker with the humanitarian mission. MR. LEHRER -- So what would you say, governor, to somebody who would say, ''Hey, wait a minute. Why not Africa? I mean, why the Middle East? Why the Balkans but not Africa when 600,000 people's lives are at risk?''MR. BUSH -- Well, I understand. And Africa's important. And we've got to do a lot of work in Africa to promote democracy and trade. And there are some -- the vice president mentioned Nigeria. It's a fledgling democracy. We've got to work with Nigeria. It's an important continent. But there's got to be priorities. And Middle East is a priority for a lot of reasons as is Europe and the Far East, and our own hemisphere. And those are my four top priorities should I be the president. It's not to say we won't be engaged. Nor trying -- nor should we -- work hard to get other nations to come together to prevent atrocity. I thought the best example of a way to handle a situation was East Timor when we provided logistical support to the Australians; support that only we can provide. I thought that was a good model. But we can't be all things to all people in the world, Jim. And I think that's where maybe the vice president and I begin to have some differences. I am worried about overcommitting our military around the world. I want to be judicious in its use. You mentioned Haiti. I wouldn't have sent troops to Haiti. I didn't think it was a mission worthwhile. It was a nation-building mission. And it was not very successful. It cost us billions -- a couple of billions of dollars and I'm not so sure democracy's any better off in Haiti than it was before. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore, do you agree with -- with the governor's views on nation-building, the use of military, our military to -- for nation-building as he described it then defined it? MR. GORE -- I don't think we agree on that. I would certainly also be judicious in evaluating any potential use of American troops overseas. I think we have to be very reticent about that. But look, Jim, the world is changing so rapidly. The way I see it, the world's getting much closer together. Like it or not, we are now, the United States is now the natural leader of the world. All these other countries are looking to us. Now, just because we cannot be involved everywhere and shouldn't be doesn't mean that we should shy away from going in anywhere. Now, both of us are kind of, I guess, stating the other's position in a maximalist extreme way, but I think there is a difference here. This idea of nation-building is kind of a pejorative phrase, but think about the great conflict of the past century, World War II.During the years between World War I and World War II, a great lesson was learned by our military leaders and the people of the United States. The lesson was that in the aftermath of World War I we kind of turned our backs and left them to their own devices and they brewed up a lot of trouble that quickly became World War II. And acting upon that lesson, in the aftermath of our great victory in World War II, we laid down the Marshall Plan, President Truman did; we got intimately involved in building NATO and other structures there. We still have lots of troops in Europe. And what did we do in the late 40's and 50's and 60's? We were nation-building. And it was economic. But it was also military. And the confidence that those countries recovering from the wounds of war had by having troops there, we had civil administrators come in to set up their ways of building their towns back. MR. LEHRER -- But you said in the Boston debate, governor, on this issue of nation-building that the United States military is overextended now. Where is it overextended? MR. BUSH -- Well --MR. LEHRER -- Where are there U.S. military that you would bring home if you become president? MR. BUSH -- Well, first let me just say one comment about what the vice president said. I think one of the lessons in between World War I and World War II is we let our military atrophy. And we can't do that, we've got to rebuild our military. But one of the problems we have in the military is we're in a lot of places around the world and I mentioned one and that's the Balkans. I'd very much like to get our troops out of there. I recognize we can't do it now, nor do I advocate an immediate withdrawal. That would be an abrogation of our agreement with NATO. No one is suggesting that, but I think it ought to be one of our priorities to work with our European friends to convince them to put troops on the ground. And there is an example. Haiti is another example. Now there are some places where I think, you know I supported the administration in Colombia. I think it's important for us to be training Colombians in that part of the world, our hemisphere is in our interests to have a peaceful Colombia. But --MR. LEHRER -- I was just going to -- the use of the military. Some people are now suggesting that if you don't want to use the military to maintain the peace, to do the civil thing, is it time to consider a civil force of some kind that comes in after the military that builds nations or all of that? Is that on your radar screen? MR. BUSH -- I don't think so. I think what we need to do is convince people who live in the lands they live in to build the nations. Maybe I'm missing something here. I mean we're going to have kind of a nation-building corps from America. Absolutely not. Our military is meant to fight and win war. That's what it's meant to do and when it gets overextended, morale drops. Well, listen, I strongly believe we need to have a military presence in the Korean peninsula not only to keep the peace in the peninsula but to keep regional stability. And I strongly believe we need to keep a presence in NATO. But I'm going to be judicious as to how to use the military. It needs to be in our vital interest. The mission needs to be clear and the exit strategy obvious. MR. GORE -- Well, I don't disagree with that. I certainly don't disagree that we ought to get our troops home from places like the Balkans as soon as we can, as soon as the mission is complete. That's what we did in Haiti. There are no more than a handful of American military personnel in Haiti now. And the Haitians have their problems but we gave them a chance to restore democracy, and that's really about all we can do. But if you have a situation like that right in our back yard, with chaos about to break out and flotillas forming to come across the water and all kinds of violence there right in one of our neighboring countries there, then I think that we did the right thing there. And as for this idea of nation-building. The phrase sounds grandiose. And you know, we can't be, we can't allow ourselves to get overextended. I certainly agree with that, and that's why I've supported building, building up our capacity. I've devoted, in the budget I've proposed, as I said last week, more than twice as much as the governor has proposed. I think that it's in better shape now than he generally does. We've had some disagreements about that. He said that two divisions would have to report not ready for duty and that's not what the Joint Chiefs say. But there's no doubt that we have to continue building up readiness and military strength. And we have to also be very cautious in the way we use our military. MR. LEHRER -- In the nonmilitary area of influencing events around the world, the financial and economic area, World Bank president Wolfensohn said recently, governor, that U.S. contributions to overseas development assistance is lower now, almost than it has ever been. Is that a problem for you? Do you think -- what is your idea about what the United States' obligations are? I'm talking about financial assistance and that sort of thing, to other countries, to poor countries. MR. BUSH -- Well I mentioned third-world debt. MR. LEHRER -- Sure. MR. BUSH -- That's a place where we can use our generosity to influence in a positive way -- influence nations. I believe we ought to have foreign aid. But I don't think we ought to just have foreign aid for the sake of foreign aid. I think foreign aid needs to be used to encourage markets and reform. I think a lot of times we just spend aid and say we feel better about it and it ends up being spent the wrong way. And there are some pretty egregious examples recently, one being Russia where we had I.M.F. loans that end up in the pockets of a lot of powerful people and didn't help the nation. I think the I.M.F. has got a role in the world. But I don't want to see the I.M.F. out there as a way to say to world bankers, 'If you make a bad loan, we'll bail you out.' It needs to be available for emergency situations. I thought the president did the right thing on -- with Mexico and was very strongly supportive of the administration in Mexico. But I don't think I.M.F. and our -- ought to be a stop loss for people who ought to be able to evaluate risk themselves. So I look at every place where we're investing money. I just want to make sure the return is good. MR. LEHRER -- Do you think we're meeting our obligations properly? MR. GORE -- No, I would make some changes. I think there need to be reforms in the I.M.F. I've generally supported it, but I've seen them make some calls that I thought were highly questionable. And I think there's a general agreement in many parts of the world now that there ought to be changes in the I.M.F. The World Bank, I think, is generally doing a better job. But I think one of the big issues here that doesn't get nearly enough attention is the issue of corruption. The governor mentioned it earlier. I've worked on this issue. It's an enormous problem. And corruption in official agencies like militaries and police departments around the world, customs officials. That's one of the worst forms of it. And we have got to, again, lead by example and help these other countries that are trying to straighten out their situations find the tools in order to do it. I just think, Jim, that this is an absolutely unique period in world history. The world's coming together, as I said. They're looking to us. And we have a fundamental choice to make: Are we going to step up the plate as a nation the way we did after World War II, the way that generation of heroes said, O.K., the United States is going to be the leader. And the world benefited tremendously from the courage that they showed in those postwar years. I think that in the aftermath of the cold war, it's time for us to do something very similar, to step up to the plate, to provide the leadership on the environment, leadership to make sure the world economy keeps moving in the right direction. Again that means not running big deficits here and not squandering our surplus. It means having intelligent decisions that keep our prosperity going and shepherds that economic strength so that we can provide that leadership role. MR. BUSH -- Let me comment on that. MR. LEHRER -- Sure. MR. BUSH -- Yeah. I'm not so sure the role of the United States is to go around the world and say this is the way it's got to be. We can help. And maybe it's just our difference in government, the way we view government. I mean, I want to empower people, I don't -- you know, I want to help people help themselves, not have government tell people what to do. I just don't think it's the role of the United States to walk into a country and say, we do it this way, so should you. I think we can help. And I know we've got to encourage democracy in the marketplaces. But take Russia, for example. We went into Russia, we said here's some I.M.F. money. It ended up in Viktor Chernomyrdin's pocket, and others. And yet we played like there was reform. The only people who are going to reform Russia are Russians -- they're going to have to make the decision themselves. Mr. Putin is going to have to make the decision as to whether or not he wants to adhere to rule of law and normal accounting practices so that if countries and-or entities invest capital there's a reasonable rate of return, a way to get the money out of the economy. But Russia has to make the decision. We can work with them on security matters, for example, but it's their call to make. So I'm not exactly sure where the vice president's coming from, but I think one way for us to end up being viewed as the ugly American is for us to go around the world saying, we do it this way, so should you. Now, we trust freedom. We know freedom is a powerful, powerful, powerful force, much bigger than the United States of America, as we saw recently in the Balkans. But, maybe I misunderstand where you're coming from, Mr. Vice President, but I think the United States must be humble and must be proud and confident of our values, but humble in how we treat nations that are figuring out how to chart their own course. MR. LEHRER -- Let's move on. No, let's move on. MR. GORE -- Far be it for me to suggest otherwise. MR. LEHRER -- First, a couple of follow-ups from the vice presidential debate last week. Vice President Gore, would you support or sign as president a federal law banning racial profiling by police and other authorities at all levels of government? MR. GORE -- Yes, I would. The only thing an executive order can accomplish is to ban it in federal law-enforcement agencies. But I would also support a law in the Congress that would have the effect of doing the same thing. I just, I think the racial profiling is a serious problem. I remember when the stories first came out about the stops in New Jersey by the highway patrol there. And I know it's been going on a long time. In some ways this is just a new label for something that's been going on for years. But I have to confess that it was the first time that I really focused on it in a new way. And I was surprised at the extent of it. And I think we've now got so many examples around the country, that we really have to find ways to end this. Imagine what it is like for someone to be singled out unfairly, unjustly and feel the unfair force of law simply because of race or ethnicity. Now that runs counter to what the United States of America is all about at our core. And it's not an easy problem to solve, but if I am entrusted with the presidency it will be the first civil rights act of the 21st century. MR. BUSH -- I can't imagine what it would be like to be singled out because of race and stopped and harassed. That's just flat wrong. And that's not what America's all about. And so we ought to do everything we can to end racial profiling. One of my concerns, though, is I don't want to federalize the local police forces. I want to -- obviously in the egregious cases we need to enforce civil rights law. But we need to make sure that internal affairs divisions at the local level do their job and be given a chance to do their job. I believe in local control of governments. And obviously if they don't there needs to be a consequence at the federal level. But it's very important that we not overstep our bounds. And I think most people -- most police officers are good, dedicated, honorable citizens who are doing their job, putting their lives at risk, who aren't bigoted or aren't prejudiced. I don't think they ought to be held guilty. But I do think we need to find out where racial profiling occurs and do something about it and say to the local folks, get it done and if you can't, there'll be a federal consequence. MR. LEHRER -- And that could be a federal law? MR. BUSH -- Yeah. MR. LEHRER -- And you would agree? MR. GORE -- I would agree. And I also agree that most police officers, of course, are doing a good job and hate this practice also. I talked to an African-American police officer in Springfield, Mass., not long ago who raised this question and said that in his opinion one of the biggest solutions is in the training. And not only the training in police procedures but human -- human relations. And, and I think that racial profiling is part of a larger issue of how we deal with race in America. And as for singling people out because of race, you know, James Byrd was singled out because of his race in Texas. And other Americans have been singled out because of their race or ethnicity. And that's why I think that we can embody our values by passing a hate crimes law. I think these crimes are different. I think they're different because they're based on prejudice and hatred, which gives rise to crimes that have not just a single victim but they're intended to stigmatize and dehumanize a whole group of people. MR. LEHRER -- You have a different view of that. MR. BUSH -- No, I don't, really. MR. LEHRER -- On hate crimes laws? MR. BUSH -- No. We've got one in Texas and guess what. The three men who murdered James Byrd. Guess what's going to happen to them? They're going to be put to death. A jury found them guilty and -- it's going to be hard to punish them any worse after they get put to death. And it's the right cause so it's the right decision. Secondly, there is other forms of racial profiling that goes on in America. Arab Americans are racially profiled on what's called secret evidence. People are stopped. And we got to do something about that. My friend Senator Spencer Abraham of Michigan is pushing a law to make sure that, you know, Arab Americans are treated with respect. So racial profiling isn't just an issue with local police forces. It's an issue throughout our society. And as we become a diverse society, we're going to have to deal with it more and more. I just -- I believe, though -- I believe, sure as I'm sitting here, that most Americans really care, they're tolerant people, they're good, tolerant people. It's the very few that create most of the crises. And we just have  to find them and deal with them. MR. LEHRER -- What, if you become president, governor, are there other areas, racial problem areas, that you would deal with as president involving discrimination --MR. BUSH -- Sure. MR. LEHRER -- -- again, you said Arab Americans. But also Hispanics, Asians, as well as blacks in this country. MR. BUSH -- Let me tell you where the biggest discrimination comes: in public education when we just move children through the schools. My friend Phyllis Hunter's here. She had one of the greatest lines of all lines. She said, ''Reading is the new civil right.'' And she's right. And to make sure our society is as hopeful as it possibly can be, every single child in America must be educated, I mean every child. It starts with making sure every child learns to read, K-through-2 diagnostic testing so we know whether or not there's a deficiency, curriculum that works and phonics needs to be an integral part of our reading curriculum, intensive reading laboratories, teacher retraining. I mean, there needs to be a wholesale effort against racial profiling, which is illiterate children. We can do better in our public schools. We can close an achievement gap and it starts with making sure we have strong accountability, Jim, one of the cornerstones of reform and good reform is to measure. Because when you measure you can ask the question, do they know? Is anybody being profiled? Is anybody being discriminated against? It becomes a tool, a corrective tool. And I believe the federal government must say that if you receive any money, any money from the federal government for disadvantaged children, for example, you must show us whether or not the children are learning. And if they are, fine; and if they're not, there has to be a consequence. And so to make sure we end up getting rid of the basic structural prejudice is education. There's nothing more prejudiced that not educating a child. MR. LEHRER -- Would you support a national hate crimes law? MR. BUSH -- I would support the Orrin Hatch version of it, not the Senator Kennedy version. But let me say to you, Mr. Vice President, we're happy with our laws on our books. That bill -- there was another bill that did die in committee, but I want to repeat, if you have a state that fully supports the law, like we do in Texas, we're going to go after all crime, and we're going to make sure people get punished for the crime. And in this case, we can't enhance the penalty any more than putting those three thugs to death, and that's what's going to happen in the state of Texas. MR. LEHRER -- New subject, new question, another vice-presidential debate follow-up. Governor, both Senator Lieberman and Secretary Cheney said they were sympathetically rethinking their views on same-sex relationships. What's your position on that? MR. BUSH -- I'm not for gay marriage. I think marriage is a sacred institution between a man and a woman and I appreciated the way the administration signed the Defense of Marriage Act. I presume the vice president supported it when the president signed that bill and supports it now. But I think marriage is a sacred institution. I'm going to be respectful, for people who may disagree with me. I've had a record of doing so in the state of Texas. I've been a person that would have been called a uniter, not a divider, because I accepted some, I accept other people's points of view, but I feel strongly that marriage should be between a man and a woman. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. GORE -- I agree with that, and I did support that law. But I think that we should find a way to allow some kind of civic unions. And I basically agree with Dick Cheney and Joe Lieberman, and I think the three of us have one view and the governor has another view. MR. LEHRER -- Is that right? MR. BUSH -- I'm not sure what kind of view he's ascribing to me. I can just tell you, I'm a person who respects other people. I respect their -- one day he says he agrees with me, then he says he doesn't, I'm not sure where he's coming from. But I will be a tolerant person. I've been a tolerant person all my life. I just happen to believe strongly that marriage is between a man and a woman. MR. LEHRER -- Do you believe, in general terms, that gays and lesbians should have the same rights as other Americans? MR. BUSH -- Yes. I don't think they ought to have special rights. But I think they ought to have the same rights. MR. GORE -- Well, there's a law pending called the Employment Nondiscrimination Act. I strongly support it. What is says is that gays and lesbians can't be fired from their job because they're gay or lesbian. And it would be a federal law preventing that. Now, I wonder if the -- it's been blocked by the opponents in the majority in the Congress. I wonder if the governor would lend his support to that law. MR. LEHRER -- Governor. MR. BUSH -- . . . question . . .MR. LEHRER -- Well, but it's a logical --MR. BUSH -- Well, I have no idea. I mean, he can throw out all kinds of -- I don't know the particulars of this law. I will tell you, I'm the kind of person, I don't hire or fire somebody based upon their sexual orientation. As a matter of fact I'd like to take the issue a little further. I don't really think it's any of my -- you know, any of my concern what, how you conduct your sex life. And I think that's a private matter. And I think that's the way it ought to be. But I'm going to be respectful for people. I'll tolerate people. And I support equal rights but not special rights for people. MR. LEHRER -- And special rights -- how does that affect gays and lesbians? MR. BUSH -- Well, it'd be if they're given special protective status. And that doesn't mean we shouldn't fully enforce laws and fully protect people and fully honor people, which I will do as the President of the United States. MR. LEHRER -- New subject in question, Vice President Gore. How do you see the connection between controlling gun sales in this country and the incidence of death by accidental or intentional use of guns? MR. GORE -- Jim, I hope that we can come back to the subject of education because the governor made an extensive statement on it and I have a very different view than the one he expressed. But that having been said, I believe that -- well, first of all, let me say, that the governor and I agree on some things where this subject is concerned. I will not do anything to affect the rights of hunters or sportsmen. I think that homeowners have to be respected in their right to have a gun if they wish to. The problem I see is that there are too many guns getting into the hands of children and criminals and people who for whatever reason, some kind of history of -- of stalking or domestic abuse, really should not be able to get guns. I think these assault weapons are a problem. So I favor closing the gun-show loophole. In fact, I cast the tie-breaking vote to close it, but then the majority in the House of Representatives went the other way. That's still pending. If we could get agreement on that and maybe they could pass that in the final days of this Congress. I think we ought to restore the three-day waiting period under the Brady Law. I think we should toughen the enforcement of gun laws so that the ones that are already on the books can be enforced much more effectively. Some of the restrictions that have been placed by the Congress in the last couple of years, in the last few years, I think have been unfortunate. I think that we ought to make all schools gun free. Have a gun-free zone around every school in this country. I think that measures like these are important. Child safety trigger locks on a mandatory basis and others. MR. LEHRER -- Governor. MR. BUSH -- Well, it starts with enforcing the law. We need to say loud and clear to somebody, if you're going to carry a gun illegally, we're going to arrest you, if you're going to sell a gun illegally you need to be arrested, and if you commit a crime with a gun there needs to be absolutely certainty in the law. And that needs to -- the local law enforcement officials need help at the federal level. Need programs like Project Exile, where the federal government intensifies arresting people who illegally use guns. And we haven't done a very good job of that at the federal level recently. And I'm going to make it a priority. Secondly, I don't think we ought to be selling guns to people who shouldn't have them. That's why I support instant background checks at gun shows. One of the reasons we have an instant background check is so that we instantly know whether or not somebody should have a gun or not. In Texas, I tried to do something innovatively, which is that, you know, there's a lot of talk about, you know, trigger locks being on guns sold in the future, I support that. But I said, let's -- if you want a trigger lock to make your gun safe, come to, come and get one for free. And so we're distributing in our state of Texas for free. I think we ought to raise the age at which a juvenile can carry a handgun from 18 to 21. I disagree with the vice president on this issue. I don't -- he's for registration of guns. I think the only people who are going to show up to register or get a license, I guess licensing, like a driver's license of a gun, the only people who are going to show up are law-abiding citizens. The criminal's not going to show up and say, hey, give me my I.D. card, it's the law-abiding citizens who'll do that, and I just, I don't think that's going to be an effective tool to make the, keep our society safe. MR. LEHRER -- All right, so, on guns, somebody wants to cast a vote based on your differences, where are the differences? MR. GORE -- Well, I'm not for registration. I am for licensing by states of new handgun purchases --MR. LEHRER -- What exactly, what's that mean? MR. GORE -- A photo license I.D. like a driver's license for new handguns. And you know, the Los Angeles --MR. LEHRER -- Excuse me, you would have to get the license, a photo I.D. to go in and before you could buy the gun? MR. GORE -- Correct. At the time --MR. LEHRER -- All right. And who would issue the --MR. GORE -- The state. I think states should do that for new handguns, because too many criminals are getting guns. There was a recent investigation of the number in Texas who were given concealed weapons permits in spite of the fact that they had records and the Los Angeles Times spent a lot of ink going into that. But I am not for doing anything that would affect hunters or sportsmen, rifles, shotguns, existing handguns. I do think that sensible gun safety measures are warranted now. Look, this is in the aftermath of Columbine and Paducah and all of the places around our country where the nation has been shocked by these weapons in the hands of the wrong people. The woman who bought the guns for the two boys who did that killing in Columbine said that if she had had to give her name and fill out a form there she would not have bought those guns. That conceivably could have prevented that tragedy. MR. LEHRER -- Back to the question about the differences on gun control. What are they, governor, from your point of view, between you and the vice president? MR. BUSH -- Well, I'm not for photo licensing. But let me say something about Columbine. And listen, we've got gun laws. He says we ought to have gun-free schools. Everybody believes that. I'm sure every state in the union's got them. You can't carry a gun into a school. And there ought to be a consequence when you do carry a gun into a school. But Columbine spoke to a larger issue and it's really a matter of culture, it's a culture that somewhere along the line we've begun to disrespect life. Where, for a child can walk in and have their heart turn dark as a result of being on the Internet and walk in and decide to take somebody else's life. And so gun laws are important, no question about it. But so is loving children and character education classes and faith-based programs being a part of afterschool programs. Somebody, some desperate child that needs to have somebody put their arm around him and say we love you and so there's a, this is a society of ours that's got to do a better job of teaching children right from wrong. And we can enforce law, but there seems to be a lot of preoccupation on, not necessarily in this debate, but just in general in law, but there's a larger law: Love your neighbor like you'd like to be loved yourself. And that's where our society must head if we're going to be a peaceful and prosperous society. MR. GORE -- I also believe in the golden rule. And I agree with a lot of the other things that the governor has said. We do have a  serious problem in our culture. Tipper and I have worked on the problem of violence and entertainment aimed at children. She's worked on it longer than I have. But I feel very strongly about that. And if I'm elected president, I will do something about that. But I think that we have to start with better parenting. But I don't think that we can ignore the role played by guns. I mean, the fact is that there -- even no state wants them, there are guns in some schools. And the reason it's so difficult for schools to control that is because in recent years there has been a flood of cheap handguns that are so widely available that kids are finding ways to get a hold of them. And I think that if you look at the situation as it exists here in the United States compared to any other country in the world, it seems to me pretty obvious that while we respect the rights of hunters and sportsmen, we do need some common sense gun safety steps to stem this flood of guns that are getting into the wrong hands. MR. BUSH -- Yeah, no question about that. But there's -- also needs to be strong enforcement of the law. Some kid who feels like they can -- doesn't matter where the gun comes from. It could be a cheap gun, expensive gun. What matters is something in this person's head says there's not going to be a consequence. So in my state we toughened up the juvenile justice laws, we added beds, we're tough. We believe in tough love. We say if you get caught carrying a gun, you're automatically detained. And that's what needs to happen. And we've got laws. If laws need to be strengthened, like instant background checks, that's important. MR. LEHRER -- New question. MR. BUSH -- O.K.MR. LEHRER -- New question. MR. BUSH -- As I was saying. MR. LEHRER -- Both of you, governor, both of you have talked much about Medicare and health care for seniors. What about the more than 40 million younger Americans who do not have health insurance right now? What would you do about that. MR. BUSH -- Well, I've got a plan to do something about that. It's to make health care affordable and available this way: First, there are some who should be buying health care who choose not to. There --MR. LEHRER -- Some of the 40 million. MR. BUSH -- Some of the healthy folks, you know the young kids say I'll never get sick; therefore I'm not going to have -- don't need health care right now. And for those, what I think we need to do is to develop an investment-type vehicle that would be an incentive for, for them to invest. Like medical savings accounts with roll-over capacity. In other words, you say to a youngster, It'll be in your financial interest to start saving for future illness. But for the working folks that do want to have health care, that can't afford it, a couple of things we need to do: One, we need more community health centers. I've put out money in my budget to, to expand community health centers all around the country. These are places where people can get primary care. Secondly -- and they're good. They're very important parts of the safety net of health care. Secondly, that you get a $2,000 rebate from the government if you're a family of $30,000 or less -- it scales down as it gets higher -- that you can use to purchase health care in the private markets. It's -- it'll be a huge down payment for a pretty darn good system if you allow -- also allow -- convince states to allow -- allow states to allow the mother to match some of the children's health insurance money with it, to pool purchasing power. And to make health care more affordable, allow business associations like the National Federation of Independent Business or the Chamber of Commerce or the National Restaurant Association to write association plans across jurisdictional lines so that small businesses have got the capacity of national pooling to drive the cost of insurance down. I think that's the very best way to go. It empowers people. It trusts people. It makes it -- and it's a practical way to encourage people to purchase health care insurance. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore? MR. GORE -- It's one of my top priorities, Jim, to give every single child in the United States affordable health care within the next four years. I'd like to see, eventually, in this country, some form of universal health care, but I'm not for a government-run system. In fact, I'm for shrinking the size of government. I want a smaller and smarter government. I have been in charge of this reinventing government streamlining project that's reduced the size of government by more than 300,000 people in the last several years and the budget plan that I've put out, according to The Los Angeles Times, again, the way these things are typically measured, as a percentage of the G.D.P., will bring government spending down to the lowest level in 50 years. So I want to proceed carefully to cover more people. But I think that we should start by greatly expanding the so-called child health insurance, or CHIP program, to give health insurance to every single child in this country. I think it's intolerable that we have so many millions of children without any health insurance. So it's one of my top priorities. Now, I know that we have some disagreements on this and I'm sorry to tell you that, you know, there is a record here, and Texas ranks 49th out of the 50 states in health care, in children with health care, 49th for women with health care, and 50th for families with health care. So it is a priority for me, I guarantee you. I'm not aware of any program -- well, I'll just leave it at that. I think it ought to be a top priority. MR. LEHRER -- Governor, did the vice president -- are the vice president's figures correct about Texas? MR. BUSH -- Well, first of all, let me say he's not for a government-run health care system -- I thought that's exactly what he and Mrs. Clinton and them fought for in 1993, was a government-run health care system that was fortunately stopped in its tracks. Secondly, we spent $4.7 billion a year on the uninsured in the state of Texas. Our rate of uninsured, the percentage of uninsured in Texas has gone down, while the percentage of uninsured in America has gone up. Our CHIPS program got a late start because our government meets only four months out of every two years, Mr. Vice President. May come for a shock for somebody who's been in Washington for so long, but actually limited government can work, in the second-largest state in the union. And therefore Congress passes the bill after our session in 1997 ended, we passed the enabling legislation in '99, we've signed up over 110,000 children to the CHIPS program. For comparable states our size, we're signing them up fast as any other state. And I -- you can quote all the numbers you want, but I'm telling you, we care about our people in Texas. We spend a lot of money to make sure people get health care in the state of Texas, and we're doing a better job than they are at the national level for reducing uninsured. MR. LEHRER -- Is he right? MR. GORE -- Well, I don't know about the, all these percentages that he throws out, but I do know that -- I speculate that the reason why he didn't answer your question directly as to whether my numbers were right, the facts were right, about Texas ranking dead last in families with health insurance and 49th out of 50 for both children and women, is because those facts are correct. And as for why it happened, I'm no expert on the Texas procedures, but what my friends there tell me is that the governor opposed a measure put forward by Democrats in the legislature to expand the number of children that would be covered, and instead, directed the money toward a tax cut, a significant part of which went to wealthy interests. He declared the need for a new tax cut for the oil companies in Texas an emergency need, and so the money was taken away from the CHIP program. There's a -- you don't have to take my word for this, there is now a federal judge's opinion about the current management of this program ordering the State of Texas to do -- and you should read that judge's language about this. There are one-point -- I believe there are 1.4 million children in Texas who do not have health insurance, 600,000 of whom -- and maybe some of those have since gotten it -- but as of a year ago, 600,000 of them were actually eligible for it but they -- they couldn't sign up for it because of the barriers that they had to surmount. MR. LEHRER -- Let's let the governor respond to that. MR. BUSH -- I -- I -- I --MR. LEHRER -- Are those numbers direct? Are his charges correct? MR. BUSH -- If he's trying to allege that I'm a hard-hearted person and I don't care about children, he's absolutely wrong. We spent $4.7 billion a year in the State of Texas for uninsured people and they get health care. Now, that's not the most efficient way to get people health care, but I want to remind you, the number of uninsured in America during their watch has increased and so he can make any excuse he wants but the facts are that we're reducing the number of uninsured as a percentage of our population. And as a percentage of the population that's increasing nationally. But somehow the allegation that we don't care and we're going to give money for this interest or that interest and not for children in the State of Texas is totally absurd. And -- and I -- let me just say who the jury is: the people of Texas. There's only been one governor ever elected to back-to-back four-year terms and that was me. And I was able to do so with a lot of Democrat votes, nearly 50 percent of the Hispanic vote, about 27 percent of the African-American vote because people know that I'm a conservative person and a compassionate person. So we can throw all the kinds of numbers around, I'm just telling you our state comes together to do what's right. We come together both Republicans and Democrats. MR. LEHRER -- Let me put that directly to you, Vice President Gore. The reason you brought this up is that, are you suggesting that those numbers and that record will reflect the way Governor Bush will operate in this area of health insurance as president? MR. GORE -- Yes, yes. But it's not a statement about his heart. I don't claim to know his heart. I think he's a good person. I make no allegations about that. I believe him when he says that, that he has a good heart. I, I know enough about your story to, to admire a lot of the things that you have done as a person. But I think it's about his priorities. And let me tell you exactly why I think that the choice he made to give a tax cut for the oil companies and others before addressing this -- I mean if, if you were the governor of a state that was dead last in health care for families and all of a sudden you found yourself with the biggest surplus your state had ever had in its history, wouldn't you want to maybe use some of it to climb from 50th to, say, 45 or 40 or something or maybe better? I would. Now, but here's why it's directly relevant, Jim. Because by his own budget numbers, his proposals for spending on tax cuts for the wealthiest of the wealthy are more than the new spending proposals that he has made for health care and education and national defense all combined. According to his own numbers. So it's not a question of his heart. It's -- as far as I know -- it's a, it's a question of priorities and values. See, you know --MR. BUSH -- Let me --MR. LEHRER -- Let me ask --MR. BUSH -- Well, first of all, that's simply not true, what he just said, of course. And secondly I repeat --MR. LEHRER -- What is not true, governor? MR. BUSH -- That we spent -- the top 1 percent received 223 as opposed to 445 billion in new spending. The top -- and let's talk about my tax plan. The top 1 percent pay, will pay one-third of all the federal income taxes. And in return get one-fifth of the benefits because -- benefits because most of the tax reductions go to the people at the bottom end of the economic ladder. That stands in stark contrast, by the way, to a man who's going to leave 50 million Americans out of tax relief. We just have a different point of view. It's a totally different point of view. He believes only the right people ought to get tax relief. I believe everybody who pays taxes ought to get tax relief. Let me go back to Texas, for example, for a minute. We pay 4.7 billion. I can't emphasize to you how much. I signed a bill that puts CHIPs in place. The bill finally came out at the end of the '99 session. We're working hard to sign up children. We're doing it faster than any other -- than any other state our size -- comparable state. We're making really good progress. And our state cares a lot about our children. My priority is going to be the health of our citizens. These folks have had eight years to get something done in Washington, D.C. on the uninsured. They have not done it. They've had eight years to get something done on Medicare and they have not got it done. And my case to the American people is if you're happy with inactivity, stay with the horse. The horse is up there now. But if you want change, you need to get somebody who knows how to bring Republicans and Democrats together to get positive things done for America. MR. LEHRER -- New question. New subject. Vice President Gore, on the environment, in your 1992 book you said ''We must make the rescue of our environment the simple organizing principle for civilization and there must be a wrenching transformation to save the planet. Do you still feel that way? MR. GORE -- I do. I think that in this 21st century we will soon see the consequences of what's called global warming. There was a study just a few weeks ago suggesting that in summertime the north polar ice cap will be completely gone in 50 years. Already many people see the strange weather conditions that the old-timers say they've never seen before in their lifetimes. And what's happening is the level of pollution is increasing significantly. Now here's the good news Jim. If we take the leadership role and build the new technologies like the new kinds of cars and trucks that Detroit is itching to build, then we can create millions of good new jobs by being first into the market with these new kinds of cars and trucks and other kinds of technologies. You know, the Japanese are breathing down our necks on this. They're moving very rapidly because they know that it is a fast-growing world market. And some of these other countries, particularly in the developing world, their pollution is much worse than anywhere else. And their people want higher hire standards of living. And so they're looking for ways to satisfy their desire for a better life and still reduce pollution at the same time. I think that holding on to the old ways and the old argument that the environment and the economy are in conflict is really outdated. We have to be bold, we have to provide leadership. Now it's true that we disagree on this. The governor said that he doesn't think this problem is necessarily caused by people. He's for letting the oil companies into the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Houston's just become the smoggiest city in the country and Texas is No. 1 in industrial pollution. We have a very different outlook and I'll tell you this, I will fight for a clean environment in ways that strengthen our economy. MR. LEHRER -- Governor? MR. BUSH -- Well, let me start with Texas. We are a big industrial state but we're, reduced our industrial waste by 11 percent. We cleaned up more brown fields than any other administration in my state's history, 450 of them. Our water is cleaner now --MR. LEHRER -- Explain what a brownfield is for those who don't follow this. MR. BUSH -- A brownfield is an abandoned industrial site that just sits idle in some of our urban centers. And people that are willing to invest capital in the brown fields don't want to do so for fear of law suit. I think we ought to have federal liability protection, depending upon whether or not standards have been met. Book you mentioned that Vice President Gore wrote, he also called for taxing, big energy taxes in order to clean up the environment. And now that the energy prices are high, I guess he's not advocating those big energy taxes right now. I believe we ought to fully fund the Land and Water Conservation Fund, with half the money going to states so states can make the right decisions for environmental quality. I think we need to have clean coal technologies, I proposed $2 billion worth. By the way, I just found out the other day an interesting fact, that there's a national petroleum reserve right next to Prudhoe Bay that your administration had opened up for exploration in that pristine area. And that was a smart move because there's gas reserves up there. We need gas pipelines to bring the gas down. Gas is a clean fuel that we can burn to -- we need to make sure that if we de-control our plants, that there's mandatory, that the plants are, must conform to clean air standards. The grandfather plants, that's what we did in Texas, no excuses, I mean, you must conform. In other words, there are practical things we can do. But it starts with working in collaborative effort with states and local folks. You know, if you own the land, every day is Earth Day. And people care a lot about their land and care about their environment. Not all wisdom is in Washington, D.C. on this issue. MR. LEHRER -- Where do you see the basic difference, in very simple terms in two or three sentences, between you and the governor on the environment? If the voter wants to make a choice, what is it? MR. GORE -- I'm really strongly committed to clean water and clean air and cleaning up the new kinds of challenges like global warming. I -- he's right that I'm not in favor of energy taxes. I am in favor of tax cuts to encourage and give incentives for the quicker development of these new -- new kinds of technologies and -- and let me say again, Detroit is raring to go on that. We differ on the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, as I have said. We differ on whether or not pollution controls ought to be voluntary. I don't think you can -- I don't think you can get results that way. We differ on the kinds of appointments that we would make. MR. LEHRER -- But you say it's a fundamental difference. MR. GORE -- I think it's a fundamental difference and let me give you an example. He --MR. LEHRER -- Hold on one second. MR. GORE -- O.K., sure. MR. LEHRER -- We've talked about -- I just want to know, for somebody -- because we're running -- we're getting close to the end -- end of our time here. I -- if somebody wanted to make -- wanted to vote on the environment, how would you draw the differences, governor? MR. BUSH -- Well, I don't believe in command and control out of Washington, D.C. I believe Washington ought to set standards, but I don't -- again, I think we ought to be collaborative at the local levels. And I think we ought to work with people at the local levels. And by the way, I just want to make sure we -- I can't let him just say something --MR. LEHRER -- All right. MR. BUSH -- -- and not correct it. The electric decontrol bill that I fought for and signed in Texas has mandatory emission standards, Mr. Vice President. That's what we ought to do at the federal level when it comes to grant for other plants, for utilities. But there's --MR. LEHRER -- Do you think --MR. BUSH -- I think there's a difference. I think, for example, take when they took 40 million acres of land out of circulation without consulting local officials I thought that was --MR. LEHRER -- That's out in the west? MR. BUSH -- Out in the west, yes. On the logging issue, that's not the way I would have done it. Perhaps some of that land needs to be set aside. But I certainly would have consulted with governors and elected officials before I would have acted unilaterally. MR. LEHRER -- Would you believe the federal government still has some new rules and new regulations and new laws to pass in the environmental area, or do you think --MR. BUSH -- Sure, absolutely, so long as they're based upon science and they're reasonable, so long as people have input. MR. LEHRER -- What about global warming? MR. BUSH -- I think it's an issue that we need to take very seriously. But I don't think we know the solution to global warming yet and I don't think we've got all the facts before we make decisions. I'll tell you one thing I'm not going to do is I'm not going to let the United States carry the burden for cleaning up the world's air, like the Kyoto treaty would have done. China and India were exempted from that treaty. I think we need to be more even-handed as, evidently 99 senators -- I think it was 99 senators -- supported that position. MR. LEHRER -- Global warming, global warming. The Senate did turn it down. MR. BUSH -- Ninety-nine to nothing. MR. GORE -- I think that, well that vote wasn't exactly, a lot of supporters of the Kyoto treaty actually ended up voting for that because of the way it was worded, but there's no doubt there's a lot of opposition to it in the Senate. I'm not for command and control techniques either. I'm for working with the groups, not just with industry but also with the citizens groups and local communities to control sprawl in ways that the local communities themselves come up with. But I disagree that we don't know the cause of global warming. I think that we do. It's pollution, carbon dioxide and other chemicals that are even more potent, but in smaller quantities that cause this. Look, the world's temperatures going up, weather patterns are changing, storms are getting more violent and unpredictable. And what are we going to tell our children? And I'm a grandfather now. I want to be able to tell my grandson when I'm in my later years that I didn't turn away from the evidence that showed that we were doing some serious harm. In my faith tradition, it's written in the Book of Matthew, where your heart is, there is your treasure also. And I believe that we ought to recognize the value to our children and grandchildren of taking steps that preserve the environment in a way that's good for them. MR. BUSH -- Yeah, I agree. I just, I think there's been some, some of the scientists, I believe, Mr. Vice President, haven't they been changing their opinion a little bit on global warming? A profound scientist recently made a different --MR. LEHRER -- Both of you now --MR. BUSH -- But the point is --MR. LEHRER -- Excuse me. Both of you have now violated your own rules. Hold that thought. MR. GORE -- I've been trying so hard not to. MR. LEHRER -- I know, I know, but about -- under you all's rules you are not allowed to ask each other a question. I let you do it a moment ago --MR. BUSH -- Twice. MR. LEHRER -- Twice, sorry. O.K.MR. GORE -- That's an interruption, by the way. MR. LEHRER -- That's an interruption. O.K. But anyhow, you just did it, so now we're --MR. BUSH -- I'm sorry. MR. LEHRER -- That's all right. It's O.K.MR. BUSH -- I apologize, Mr. Vice President. MR. LEHRER -- No, you're not allowed to do that either, you see. No, no. I'm sorry, go ahead. Finish your thought. People care about these things, I've found out. MR. BUSH -- Course they care about -- oh, you mean the rules. MR. LEHRER -- Right, exactly right. Go ahead, sir. MR. BUSH -- What the heck. I -- of course there's a lot of -- I mean, look, global warming needs to be taken very seriously, and I take it seriously. But science -- there's a lot of -- there's differing opinions and before we react I think it's best to have the full accounting, full understanding of what's taking place. And I think to answer your question, I think both of us care a lot about the environment. We may have different approaches. We may have different approaches in terms of how we deal with local folks. I mean, I just cited an example of the administration just unilaterally acting without any input. And I remember you gave a very good answer in New Hampshire about the White Mountains, about how it was important to keep that collaborative effort in place. I feel very strongly the same place -- it certainly wasn't the attitude that took place out west, however. MR. LEHRER -- New question. MR. BUSH -- Yes. MR. LEHRER -- Last question for you, governor, and this flows somewhat out of the Boston debate. You, your running mate, your campaign officials have charged that Vice President Gore exaggerates, embellishes and stretches the facts, etc. Are you -- do you believe these are serious issues, this is a serious issue that the voters should use in deciding which one of you two men to vote for on Nov. 7? MR. BUSH -- Well, we all make mistakes. I've been known to mangle a syllable or two myself, you know. But you know what I mean. I think credibility is important. It's going to be important to be -- for the president to be credible with Congress, important for the president to be credible with foreign nations. And, yes, I think it's something that people need to consider. This -- this isn't something new. I read a report or a memo from somebody in his 1988 campaign -- I forgot the fellow's name -- warning then-Senator Gore to be careful about exaggerating claims. And, you know, I thought during his debate with Senator Bradley, saying he altered the E.I.T.C. when it didn't happen. I mentioned the last --MR. LEHRER -- E.I.T.C.?MR. BUSH -- Earned Income Tax CreditMR. LEHRER -- All right. MR. BUSH -- Sorry. MR. LEHRER -- That's all right. MR. BUSH -- A lot of initials for a guy who's not from Washington, isn't it? Anyway, I -- he co-sponsored McCain-Feingold. And yet he didn't. And so I think this is an issue. I think -- I found it to be an issue in trying to defend my tax relief package. I thought there were some exaggerations about the numbers. But the people are going to have to make up their mind on this issue. And I -- I'm going to continue to defend my record and defend my propositions against what I think are exaggerations. Exaggerations like, for example, only 5 percent of the seniors receive benefits under my Medicare reform package. That's what he said the other day. And that's simply not the case. And I have every right in the world to defend my record and my positions. That's what debates are about and that's what campaigns are about. MR. LEHRER -- Vice President Gore. MR. GORE -- I got some of the details wrong last week in some of the examples that I used, Jim, and I'm -- I'm sorry about that. And I'm going to try to do better. One of the reasons I regret it is that it, getting a detail wrong interfered several times with the point that I was trying to make. However many days that young girl in Florida stood in her classroom, however long, even if it was only one day, doesn't change the fact that there are a lot of overcrowded classrooms in America and we need to do something about that. There are seniors who pay more for their prescriptions than a lot of other people, more than their pets sometimes, more sometimes than people in -- in foreign countries. And we need to do something about that, not with a measure that leaves the majority of them without any real basic help until the next president's term of four years is -- is -- is over, but right away. And that means doing it under the Medicare program. I can't promise that I will never get another detail wrong. I can -- I can promise you that I will try not to, and hard. But I will promise you this, with all the confidence in --in -- in my heart and in the world that I will do my best, if I'm elected president, I'll work my heart out to get the big things right for the American people. MR. LEHRER -- Does that resolve the issue, governor? MR. BUSH -- That's going to be up to the people, isn't it? MR. LEHRER -- Does it resolve it for you? MR. BUSH -- It depends on what he says in the future in the campaign. MR. LEHRER -- But your folks are saying some awful things and you're --MR. BUSH -- Well, I hope they're not awful things. They're using the man's own words. MR. LEHRER -- No, no what I mean is you're calling him a serial exaggerator. MR. BUSH -- I don't believe I've used those words. MR. LEHRER -- No, but your campaign has. MR. BUSH -- Maybe they have. MR. LEHRER -- Your campaign officials have. And your campaign officials, Mr. Vice President, are now calling, now calling the governor a bungler, a --MR. BUSH -- Wait a minute. MR. LEHRER -- My point is, should this, is this --MR. GORE -- I don't use language like that and I don't think that we should. I think that --MR. LEHRER -- It's in your commercials. MR. GORE -- I understand. I haven't seen that. In my commercial? MR. LEHRER -- Yeah. MR. BUSH -- You haven't seen the commercial? MR. GORE -- I think that what, I think the point of that is that anybody would have a hard time trying to make a tax cut plan that's so large that would put us into such big deficits that gives almost half the benefits to the wealthiest of the wealthy, I think anybody would have a hard time explaining that clearly in a way that makes sense to the average person. MR. BUSH -- That's the kind of exaggeration I was just talking about. MR. GORE -- Well, I wasn't the one having trouble explaining. MR. LEHRER -- Gentlemen, it's time to go to the closing statements and Vice President Gore, you have two minutes. MR. GORE -- Jim, one of the issues that I would like to close with in my statement is education, because it's an example of the overall approach that I think is important. This race is about values, it's about change, it's about giving choices to the American people. And education is my No. 1 priority because I think that it's the most important big, major change that we can bring in our country. I agree with Governor Bush that we should have new accountability, testing of students. I think that we should require states to test all students, test schools and school districts and I think that we should go further and require teacher testing for new teachers also. The difference is that while my plan starts with new accountability and maintains local control, it doesn't stop there, because I want to give new choices to parents to send their kids to college with a $10,000 tax deduction for college tuition, per child, per year. I want to reduce the size of the classrooms in this country, for one basic reason, so that students can get more one-on-one time with teachers. And the way to do that is first to recruit more teachers. I've a plan in my budget to recruit 100,000 new highly qualified teachers and to help local school districts build new schools. I think that we have to put more emphasis on early learning and preschool. Now, here is how that connects with all the rest of what we've been talking about. If you have -- if you squander the surplus on a huge tax cut that goes mostly to those at the top, then you can't make education the top priority. If the tax cut is your No. 1, 2, 3, and 4 priority, you can't do education. You can't do both, you have to choose. I choose education and health care, the environment and retirement security, and I ask for your support. MR. LEHRER -- Governor Bush, two minutes. MR. BUSH -- Jim, thank you very much, Mr. Vice President, thank you very much, and I'd like to thank the folks here at Wake Forest. I want to thank you all for listening. I'm running to get some things done for America. There's too many issues left unresolved, there's been too much finger pointing and too much name calling in Washington, D.C. I'd like to unite this country, to get an agenda done that will speak to the hopes and aspirations of the future. I want to have an education system that sets high standards, local control of schools and strong accountability. No child should be left behind in America. I want to make sure we rebuild our military to keep the peace. I worry about morale in today's military. The warning signs are clear, it's time to have a new commander in chief who will rebuild the military, pay our men and women more and make sure they're housed better and have a focused mission for our military. Once and for all, I want to do something about Medicare. The issue's been too long on the table because it's been a political issue. It's time to bring folks together to say that all seniors will get prescription drug coverage. I want to do something about Social Security. It's a important priority because now's the time to act and we're going to say to our seniors our promises we've made to you will be promises kept. But younger workers, in order to make sure the system exists tomorrow, younger workers ought to be able to take some of your own money and invest it in -- in safe securities to get a better rate of return on that money. And finally, I do believe in tax relief. I believe we can set our priorities. I don't believe like the vice president does in huge government. I believe in limited government. And by having a limited government and a focused government, we can send some of the money back to the people that pay the bills. I want to have a tax relief for all people who pay the bills in America because I think you can spend your money more wisely than the federal government can. Thank you for listening. I'm asking for your vote. And God bless. MR. LEHRER -- And we will return next Tuesday night, Oct. 17, from Washington University in St. Louis for the third and final debate. Thank you Vice President Gore, Governor Bush. See you next week. For now, from Winston-Salem, I'm Jim Lehrer. Thank you and good night. MR. BUSH -- Good night. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN

Gov. George W. Bush's confident performance at the presidential debate on Wednesday night rested in part on the skillful way he portrayed the differences between himself and Vice President Al Gore. On issues ranging from hate crimes to prescription drugs, the environment and education, he spoke as if he and Mr. Gore were pursuing the same goals by somewhat different means. The new, subdued Al Gore let pass several opportunities to rebut Mr. Bush's characterizations. That may be a smart tactic, but it does little to clarify the policy record of the campaign. There is nothing ''fuzzy,'' to use the governor's words, about many differences between the two candidates. The vice president roused himself at the end of the debate to note that the issue did not concern Mr. Bush's ''compassion'' or ''heart,'' but his priorities. The governor has become effective at declaring his support for schools, the environment and defense, but his $1.3 trillion tax cut, heavily weighted toward the wealthy, would soak up almost all of the non-Social Security and non-Medicare budget surplus, leaving little or no room for any significant increases in spending in these areas. On Social Security, Mr. Bush's proposal to divert a sixth of the Social Security taxes out of the system and into investment accounts for future retirees might be welcomed by young people -- until they realized that draining off that money would impose substantial risk for both retirees and the system itself. Mr. Bush proclaimed his support for the environment and even said that he cared about global warming. Mr. Gore used the debate to reiterate support for partnerships with industry to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels, while Mr. Bush falsely described the Kyoto agreement by asserting that it forced the United States to go it alone on making environmental changes. In fact, the agreement was signed with the understanding that in the future, developing countries like China and India would be persuaded to be a part of it, with help from the West in developing new technologies. The difference between the two contenders was the difference between ignoring a major problem and confronting it with analysis and painstaking negotiations. Money makes the difference between the two candidates' proposals especially acute in the health sphere and education. Mr. Gore's proposals do not constitute a giant step toward universal coverage, but the money he would spend would get the country there faster than Mr. Bush's. The governor also misstated reality when he said that the percentage  of people with health insurance was going up in Texas but down in the United States at large. In fact, between 1998 and 1999, both percentages rose, after falling for several years. For schools, Mr. Bush says he wants to increase accountability, but he does not provide much money to help local districts get there. The governor said he was tolerant of gays, but he apparently regards anti-discrimination protections for them as ''special rights.'' As Mr. Gore noted, Mr. Bush did nothing to support a hate-crimes bill for gays in Texas. On gun control, Mr. Bush said he favored ''instant background checks'' for guns purchased at gun shows, but he opposes a three-day waiting period that would give law enforcement agencies the time to do more thorough checks. Taken together, these are stark differences that Mr. Gore may need to do more to emphasize in the final weeks of the campaign.

DuPont, Shell, Alcan Aluminium and four other large companies yesterday joined a growing list of businesses committing themselves to substantial voluntary reductions in releases of heat-trapping greenhouse gases. The companies said they would seek the cuts in a partnership with Environmental Defense, a private environmental group, which would give technical advice and publish audited inventories of the companies' emissions of the gases, which scientists say appear to be contributing to a potentially harmful global warming trend. If the cuts are achieved, by 2010 the companies' annual emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases would be 15 percent below levels measured in 1990. The total amount would be 90 million tons a year, said Fred Krupp, the executive director of Environmental Defense.''These are companies, unlike others, that are committing to hard caps on their total emissions all over the world,'' Mr. Krupp said yesterday. ''They don't have to, yet they're making a commitment to slim down and keep the weight off.''The moves, company representatives and environmentalists said, represent a spreading awareness in industry that emissions of greenhouse gases are eventually going to be restricted under an international climate treaty or by regulations in individual countries, with Europe, particularly, already moving toward requiring reductions in the gases. The other companies that pledged to cuts under agreements with Environmental Defense were BP, formerly known as BP Amoco, which had already been actively cutting its emissions; Suncor Energy, a Canadian company; Pechiney, a French aluminum manufacturer; and Ontario Power Generation. Some environmental groups not involved in the effort pointed out that not all the companies' motives were purely focused on staving off climate change. Some of the cuts were being made in any case, the groups said, as companies focused on increasing profits by cutting wasteful use of energy and releases of chemicals. Even so, the commitment to cut represents a significant shift, said Philip E. Clapp, the president of the National Environmental Trust, a private Washington group that has been lobbying for an international climate treaty.''In reality,'' he said, ''what they're doing is making the appropriate management decision that it makes sense to start incorporating these reductions into their costs now rather than having to do them suddenly when there's a treaty in force and a law in place.''The companies are hoping that they will be able to get credit for the reductions under planned trading arrangements allowing businesses that cut emissions beyond targets to sell credits to others that cannot make similar cuts as cheaply. The program constitutes a small-scale version of such a trading system, participants said. Besides setting goals for the seven companies, the agreement allows them to buy and sell credits gained for making cuts beyond their targets. Next month, delegates from more than 150 countries are scheduled to meet at The Hague to try to negotiate the final details of the Kyoto Protocol, a climate treaty that was signed in 1997 by more than 100 countries but has not yet been ratified by any large industrial country. The treaty would commit industrial countries between 2008 and 2012 to cut their combined greenhouse gas emissions to 5 percent below 1990 levels. Even if the treaty takes years to go into effect, the momentum toward controlling heat-trapping gases is clear, representatives of many of the participating companies said.''It's clear that the governments of the world have voiced their concern over climate change and their intent to intervene,'' said Thomas Jacob, the manager of international and industry affairs for DuPont, which has already cut greenhouse emissions 50 percent below 1990 levels and pledged yesterday to reach 65 percent below that level by 2010. Companies that act now will tend to have advantages over those that wait by getting a head start on devising ways to cut energy use -- and thus carbon dioxide emissions -- or to change manufacturing methods to eliminate releases of other greenhouse gases, Mr. Jacob said. For example, DuPont has found ways to end emissions of nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas, that once flowed from its process for making adipic acid, an ingredient in nylon. The aluminum companies in the group are focusing not only on energy savings, but also on eliminating another powerful greenhouse gas, perfluorocarbons, by changing the smelting process. Mr. Jacob added that companies that want to be perceived as environmentally responsible have to take climate change seriously. ''The growing weight of scientific evidence indicates that there is cause for concern and our bias should be in the direction of prudent action,'' he said. Under an unrelated agreement with a pair of private environmental groups, Polaroid announced last week that by 2010 it would cut its emissions of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, by 25 percent below the amount it released in 1994. Earlier this year, Johnson & Johnson and I.B.M. entered similar commitments with the groups, the World Wildlife Fund and the Center for Energy and Climate Solutions, a private group trying to promote energy efficiency. These commitments would bring the companies' emissions a decade from now well below levels they were at a decade ago. The voluntary move to cut greenhouse-gas emissions is particularly noteworthy, some environmental experts said, because it comes even though the companies have no guarantee that they will get credit for cuts they make now under future regulations or in future systems set up to allow trading of credits given to companies that reduce their output of gases below required levels. Last year, Congress considered several bills that would have granted early credit for cuts in greenhouse gases, but the legislation lost support from both industry and environmental groups and faded away. In essence, DuPont, Alcan and the others are taking a gamble, with the understanding that they may be better able to influence any impending regulations by helping devise some of the techniques for achieving cuts in the gases.''Many companies figured out in the 1990's that when an environmental issue reaches a certain level of public consciousness and seriousness, it's better to be proactive than reactive,'' said Joseph J. Romm, who once headed the Department of Energy's energy efficiency and renewable energy program and is now executive director of the Center for Energy and Climate Solutions.

Greenhouse gases produced mainly by the burning of fossil fuels are altering the atmosphere in ways that affect earth's climate, and it is likely that they have ''contributed substantially to the observed warming over the last 50 years,'' an international panel of climate scientists has concluded. The panel said temperatures could go higher than previously predicted if emissions are not curtailed. This represents a significant shift in tone -- from couched to relatively confident -- for the panel of hundreds of scientists, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which issued two previous assessments of the research into global warming theory, in 1995 and 1990. The conclusions are likely to resonate loudly next month when negotiators from most of the world's nations gather in The Hague to work out details of the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty intended to cut releases of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The 1997 treaty has been signed by more than 150 countries but has not yet been ratified by any industrialized country. The panel, which operates under the auspices of the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Program, is spelling out its new findings in a  climate assessment it began working on three years ago and which fills 1,000 pages. A summary of its findings was sent this week to governments around the world for a last round of comments before the assessment is completed at a meeting in January in Shanghai. Given the significance of issue and the disagreements over how to deal with it,  there are likely to be changes before the summary and the 14 chapters of research underlying it go to print sometime next year, several scientists involved in the project said. A copy of the summary was obtained by The New York Times from someone who was eager to have the findings disseminated before the meetings in The Hague. Many panel members said that the summary represents the closest thing to a consensus possible in science, which is generally driven more by questioning and challenges than by esprit de corps. In interviews, several members of the panel declined to discuss details of the report or the summary, saying they were not yet in their final form.  But they said recent advances in the study of climate change led them to see with greater clarity the role of people in climate change. For example, they pointed to additional temperature data gathered in the last few years, which have been substantially warmer than any similar string of years in many centuries; to improvements in computer models designed to project future trends; and to better understanding of the influence of other climate-influencing emissions, like particles of sulfates that can cool the earth by reflecting sunlight back into space. Meanwhile, they said in interviews and in the summary, evidence of increasing warming has shown up in retreating glaciers, thinning polar sea ice, retreating snow packs, warmer nights, and elsewhere.''More and more people working in atmospheric science or on climate or ecology have had to come to grips with the fact that climate change is affecting what they're looking at,'' said Dr. Kevin E. Trenberth, the head of the climate analysis division of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo., and a lead author of the panel's summary. ''There is increasing evidence from many sources that the signal of human influence on climate has emerged from natural variability, sometime around 1980.''The report's language is far more constrained than that, reflecting a delicate consensus that was reached only after months of debate and several rounds of comments by hundreds of scientists and government climate experts, Dr. Trenberth said. One of its most striking findings is its conclusion that the upper range of warming over the next 100 years could be even higher than it estimated in 1995, in a worst case raising the average global temperature 11 degrees Fahrenheit from where it was in 1990. By comparison, average temperatures today are only 9 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than they were at the end of the last Ice Age. In its 1995 analysis, the panel concluded that a worst case would raise temperatures 6.3 degrees. The worsening of the picture, ironically, is due to a projected cleansing of the atmosphere in coming decades of other emissions from fuel burning that have a cooling influence on climate -- specifically the veil of tiny particles of sulfates from unfiltered burning of coal and oil that contribute to smog and acid rain. In the last century, these sun-blocking particles probably masked substantial warming, scientists say. If they are increasingly removed as more smokestacks and tailpipes are filtered around the world, the warming from carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases would not be counteracted, the report concludes. Not everyone is satisfied with the document or the process that produced it. Dr. Richard S. Lindzen, a climate expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who has been a prominent dissenter from the view that human activity is altering climate, helped write one chapter of the assessment but is skeptical about the importance of the human contribution to any future warming. He described the summary as ''waffle words designed for one thing, to ensure that the issue remains important enough that it not be put on a back burner.''Over all, he said, there is little solid evidence that any climate change would have harmful effects. Still, even Dr. Lindzen said that he felt that the human influence on the earth's climate is now established.''There has to be a human component to the change that's under way,'' he said. The summary itself acknowledged the need for much more research, but also laid out many potentially dire consequences if the warming even takes a middle course. Even if emissions of carbon dioxide and the other gases are sharply reduced, it said, ''sea level will continue to rise due to thermal expansion for hundreds of years.''Dr. Michael Oppenheimer, a climate scientist at Environmental Defense, a private environmental group and one of the authors of the summary, said it represented a balanced, sober assessment of the risks ahead. Other scientists involved in the assessment pointed out that the authors of the summary also included Dr. Mack McFarland, an atmospheric scientist at a division of DuPont, and several other experts approaching the question from the point of view of industry. Together, they concluded that the nuanced language of 1995, which said ''the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate,'' was clearly out of date.

The international panel of climate scientists considered the most authoritative voice on global warming has now concluded that mankind's contribution to the problem is greater than originally believed. In addition, the panel warns that warming over the next 100 years could increase even more than originally estimated. Its worst-case scenario calls for a truly unnerving rise of 11 degrees Fahrenheit over 1990 temperature levels. These findings should give added urgency to next month's meeting in The Hague, where most of the world's nations will try to work out details of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, a treaty intended to cut man-made releases of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. With any luck, the new estimates will also stir curiosity in the United States Congress, where all but a few members have adopted an ostrich-like attitude toward global warming, and the Republican leadership has shown only contempt for the Kyoto accord. The 1,000-page report, due out early next year, will be the third issued since 1990 by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which was established by the United Nations to assess the most up-to-date research on global warming every five years. The report was written by 45 scientists and reviewed by hundreds more and by about 150 governments. A summary was funneled to several newspapers this week by scientists who were eager to circulate its key findings in advance of next month's meeting. The earlier reports said that man-made emissions from the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil had probably contributed to the gradual warming of the earth's atmosphere during the 20th century. But the summary of the latest report asserts more confidently that man-made gases have ''contributed substantially to the observed warming over the last 50 years.'' It also raises the worst-case estimate for a temperature rise by the year 2100, from 6.3 degrees to 11 degrees. Unfortunately, Congress has blindly refused to address the issue. Indeed the only real progress has come from the private sector. In the last year, Ford, DaimlerChrysler, Dow Chemical, I.B.M. and Johnson & Johnson have pledged to make big cuts in the greenhouse gases they produce. Recently DuPont, Shell, BP and four other multinational companies joined with Environmental Defense, a private environmental group, in a voluntary plan to reduce the wasteful use of energy and produce cleaner products. The companies hope that by reducing emissions now, they will get credit later on if and when the Kyoto Protocol is ratified and Washington embarks on a nationwide program of reducing emissions. But there will be no such program without the consent of Congress, which persists in a policy of reckless inaction.

One of these days, probably after some catastrophe in which hundreds of people are killed, we'll start to take global warming seriously. Every few months we get a scary update on this phenomenon and there's a sense of ''Well, gee, we really should be doing something about this.'' But the story quickly fades and we turn our attention back to ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,'' or the second coming of ''Survivor,'' or whatever. There's always something more pressing than global warming. Last week's update was the scariest so far. The latest climate assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concludes not only that human activity is contributing substantially to the warming of the planet, but that the warming over the next century could turn out to be much worse than previously estimated. A draft summary of the panel's findings was distributed to governments around the world last week. The panel, established by the United Nations to monitor and assess the most up-to-date research on global warming, said it expects the increase in the average global temperature over the next century to be between 3 and 11 degrees. That is huge. A three-degree warming over the course of the century would probably be the fastest warming in the history of civilization. If the warming gets close to the upper end of the estimate -- 11 degrees -- forget about it. That's a monumental change in a breathtakingly short period of time. Scientists don't even have much in the way of theoretical data to help humans get a handle on a climate change of that magnitude. With an average temperature increase of 11 degrees, the earth would be nearly as warm as it was when dinosaurs were on the prowl. Is anyone paying attention? This is not a disaster waiting to happen. It's already under way. The decade of the 1990's was very likely the hottest of the last millennium. And 1998 -- which had temperatures spiked by a large El Nino phenomenon -- appears to have been the hottest year ever recorded. The oceans are rising, mountain glaciers are shrinking, low-lying coastal areas are eroding, and the very timing of the seasons is changing. If you jack up the average global temperature another three or four or five degrees over the next several decades, your children and grandchildren will have enormous difficulties to cope with. It would have been helpful to have had a thorough discussion of global warming by the presidential candidates, a give-and-take aimed at enlightening the population and generating enthusiasm for potential solutions. But that didn't happen. Vice President Al Gore has long been an advocate of dealing aggressively with global warming, which was the focus of his book, ''Earth in the Balance.'' He recently described global warming as a ''moral issue.''The vice president helped negotiate the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty designed to reduce the release of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The treaty has been signed by more than 150 countries, but it has yet to be ratified by the United States or any other industrialized country. Mr. Gore has done some campaigning on the issue and has proposed creation of an environmental trust fund, which, among other things, would provide incentives for the development of new technologies to limit emissions of greenhouse gases. Gov. George W. Bush has been somewhat equivocal when it comes to global warming. He has acknowledged that it is a problem. But in his second debate with Mr. Gore, the governor said, ''I don't think we know the solution to global warming yet and I don't think we've got all the facts before we make decisions.''Mr. Bush opposes the Kyoto Protocol, which he has said is ''unfair to the United States.'' Nevertheless, he has offered a proposal that would require reductions in all pollutants from electric power plants, which scientists and environmental advocates see as an important step in the fight against global warming. Whoever is elected president will have an obligation to engage this issue in a real way, and quickly. Global warming is not a fantasy. It's an accelerating crisis that poses a grave threat to the newest generations of Americans and people around the world.

A case can be made that Al Gore has been the most active and influential vice president in American history. There is little the Clinton administration has done or tried to do over the last eight years in which Mr. Gore has not played some role. From his early eagerness to cut budget deficits in 1993 to the aggressive fund-raising of the 1996 campaign to his role in the final days of the Kosovo conflict in 1999, Mr. Gore has been heard and, more often than not, heeded. He has suffered some painful defeats, such as when oil-state senators beat back his proposal to use energy taxes as a deficit-reduction tool, and notable victories, such as helping to put the threat of global warming on the national policy agenda. He played a critical part in the removal of thousands of nuclear weapons from former Soviet states; in pushing, though at first without much success, for a more muscular response to the bloodshed in Bosnia; in the government's proposal to regulate tobacco as a dangerous drug. He also had a hand in pressuring the entertainment industry to accept ''v-chip'' technology to shield children from sex and mayhem on television. There were stumbles, as well. Two of the worst came in the same month, March 1997, when Mr. Gore famously told a White House news conference that ''no controlling legal authority'' barred him from making telephone calls asking for Democratic political contributions from his office. Later that month, in Beijing, Mr. Gore clinked Champagne glasses with Li Peng, the Chinese prime minister who ordered the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989.''In the history of the vice presidency, Al Gore has a unique and remarkable record,'' said Stephen Hess, a scholar of the presidency at the Brookings Institution in Washington. Mr. Gore was known within the administration as at least the second most influential adviser to the president, after Hillary Rodham Clinton. He was often the quickest to push an aggressive approach, whether on foreign policy or on budgets or on trade. But Mr. Gore was still vice president, not prime minister, and his advice was not always taken. Early in the administration, Mr. Gore sought a significant assignment, like carrying out the campaign promise to end welfare ''as we know it.'' But he wound up with the less-than-electrifying ''reinventing government'' initiative. Some of Mr. Gore's more assertive environmental ideas, like ratcheting up fuel economy standards for cars, were rejected by Mr. Clinton, who believed the issue was a political loser in the industrial Midwest. Mr. Gore's early pleas on the Balkans likewise went unheeded. In numerous internal discussions in early 1993, Mr. Gore pressed for the use of American air power to slow the ethnic slaughter in Bosnia, White House aides said. Mr. Gore was essentially silenced until 1995 when he again became a passionate advocate for allied intervention. Those who worked closely with the vice president cited his steadiness and his strength as an often welcome contrast to the pliancy of the president, who seemed to waver on his commitments to people and to policy, particularly early in his administration. But what mystifies these people is that while Mr. Gore was often bold and forceful in the councils of government, he has stumbled as a candidate and has failed to capitalize on his significant record of accomplishment to make the case for his election.''What's amazing about him is he's a much less courageous campaigner than I would have thought and much more courageous in governance than I thought he would be,'' said a senior White House official who has observed Mr. Gore closely for the last eight years. ''He was really gutsy as a government official, but that just doesn't translate to the campaign. Gore just wants to get elected, then he thinks he'll be free to do the right thing.'''Reinventing Government'Even before Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore were inaugurated in January 1993, the vice president had negotiated an unprecedented role for a No. 2.  He was not to be deputy president, but he would have real authority over a number of areas where he claimed expertise: the environment, science and technology and streamlining government. Mr. Gore exercised that power early on by placing loyalists in critical posts throughout the government. Leon Fuerth, his longtime foreign policy adviser, was included in every important meeting of the National Security Council. Carol M. Browner, a former Senate aide, was named administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. Frank W. Hunger, Mr. Gore's brother-in-law, went to the Justice Department as head of the civil division. Kathleen McGinty, another former Senate aide, was put in charge of the White House Council on Environmental Quality. Reed Hundt, a friend from Mr. Gore's prep-school days at St. Albans, was named chairman of the Federal Communications Commission. Mr. Gore's first executive assignment was running the National Performance Review, more popularly known as the ''reinventing government'' initiative, or Rego. The task involved combing the entire federal bureaucracy for waste, duplication and uneconomic purchasing practices. It was a job for an accountant, not a would-be president, but Mr. Gore took to it like a man killing rats with a broomstick. He and his aides have attributed huge cost savings to the program -- the current estimate is $137 billion -- but those claims are essentially unprovable because it is impossible to know which reductions were a result of Rego and which came from productivity improvements enjoyed by the nation at large. In his third debate with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore claimed the reinvention program had reduced government civilian employment by 300,000 workers, to the lowest level since John F. Kennedy was president. In fact, the number of total jobs cut is considerably higher -- almost 400,000 -- but two-thirds of them are military workers whose jobs were eliminated by the military drawdown brought by the end of the cold war.''Gore is clearly wrong to argue that reinventing government caused the decline in civil service employment that did occur,'' said Paul C. Light, director of governmental studies at the Brookings Institution. ''He would have been perfectly right to say the Clinton administration 'oversaw,' 'participated in,' or 'implemented' the cuts, but reinventing government did not cause the decline in total jobs. It was the end of the cold war, pure and simple.''Mr. Gore was the first vice president to serve as a full member of the National Security Council and was given broad sway over a large part of United States policy toward Russia. In April 1994, Mr. Clinton asked Mr. Gore to meet regularly with Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, then the Russian prime minister, to address aspects of United States-Russian relations that came under Mr. Gore's areas of expertise but did not rise to the presidential level. The two men took up disarmament, space cooperation, legal issues and the environment, among other issues. Bold Early MisstepsThe first year of the administration was memorable for its early chaos and the budget package that passed only with Mr. Gore casting the tie-breaking 51st vote in the Senate. The White House was riven into competing camps: those who wanted to attack the growing federal budget deficits and those who believed Mr. Clinton had to make good on his campaign promises to ''invest'' billions of new dollars in education, training and other social programs. Mr. Clinton vacillated, torn between his liberal instincts and the arguments of advisers who said the only way he would ever be able to pay for new social programs was to first convince financial markets that he was serious about controlling federal spending. Mr. Gore was firmly in the camp of the deficit hawks. And he saw an additional benefit to budget stringency: he could test his environmental theories in a real-life laboratory. The vice president pushed hard to have an energy tax included in the administration's first budget package, and Mr. Clinton finally acceded, over the objections of many political advisers who said that the painful plan was a sure loser on Capitol Hill. They were right. Congress rebelled at the proposal and the president quickly abandoned it, leaving Mr. Gore embarrassed and politically scarred.''Gore felt that if we were going to impose pain on the American people, he wanted it to be environmentally conscious,'' said a member of the administration's economic team. ''He believed that since we were raising so much from the top one or two percent, the plan's credibility depended on a little tough medicine that affected everybody.''In this battle, as in later fights, Mr. Gore argued that the public would reward boldness, that the administration would win points for taking on its own party in Congress and entrenched interests in private industry. He was wrong, as Mr. Clinton and the Democrats learned in November 1994, when Republicans took control of the House for the first time in 40 years. The economic plan, the health care proposal drafted by Mrs. Clinton, the effort to integrate gays into the armed forces were big, bold -- and politically devastating. Decisiveness AbroadBy July 1995, the vice president saw the situation in Bosnia as becoming intolerable, with American dithering making it worse. The slaughter of Bosnian Muslims by Serbian forces troubled his conscience, recalled officials close to the vice president and violated his view of America's role in the world. He had watched as the United States had humiliatingly failed to enlist European support for a plan to arm the Bosnian Muslims and pound the Serbs from the air. He had expressed, repeatedly but in private, his frustration at the president's indecision. At a pivotal White House meeting in mid-July, Mr. Gore recalled a haunting newspaper photograph of a young woman from Srebrenica who had apparently hanged herself after Serbs overran the area. He said his daughter Karenna, then 21, had seen the picture and asked him why the United States was not doing more to end the conflict. He pleaded for more forceful action to punish the Serbs, according to officials who were present.''He just erupted in anger,'' recalled Richard C. Holbrooke, now ambassador to the United Nations. ''He said we didn't have a strategy anymore, we weren't facing the implications of what we were doing. He was sitting right next to the president at the time.''Within weeks, the United States led a series of punitive air strikes on Serbian targets and pressed a diplomatic offensive that ultimately resulted in the November peace accords signed at Dayton, Ohio. The agreement called for the deployment of 20,000 United States troops to the Balkans in the role of referees between the parties to the cease-fire. The policy was vigorously debated in Congress, and in the administration. Opponents in Congress were bolstered by misgivings privately expressed by senior military officers who did not want to see American soldiers dispatched to enforce what they felt was a shaky peace deal. Some of Mr. Clinton's political advisers warned of the dangers of a major military deployment just 11 months before a presidential election. In late November, Mr. Clinton assembled his senior civilian and military advisers in the White House situation room to discuss the Balkan military mission. The president spoke of the American commitment to enact the peace accord and the moral obligation to end the Bosnian disaster. Mr. Gore then sternly addressed the Pentagon officials in the room, according to Mr. Holbrooke's recollection of the scene. His words were carefully couched, but the vice president's message was unmistakable: Get with the program or shut up.''On Somalia, Bosnia, Kosovo and the Middle East, he was always the most forceful advocate in the room for a strong policy,'' said Mr. Holbrooke, who is often mentioned as a likely candidate for secretary of state in a Gore administration. ''He wasn't always an interventionist; he's a very careful man. But he had a deep conviction on the importance of American leadership based on moral values and American national interests.''His Baby: The EnvironmentThe president and the vice president had a standing lunch date every week for the first years of the administration, broken only when one was out of town. Aides said that Mr. Gore used those sessions, among other things, as a tutorial for the president on environmental issues -- global warming, logging in the Pacific Northwest, oil drilling in Alaska, the Clean Air Act, land preservation. Mr. Gore devoted whole sessions with the president to obscure matters, like the evaporation of the Aral Sea in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. The vice president contended that these issues were, like Bosnia and other foreign policy challenges, urgent matters not only of national interest but of moral obligation to future generations. It is a point that Mr. Gore made in his book, ''Earth in the Balance'' as well as in numerous public addresses. He also persuaded the president that the environment was a winning political issue, despite opposition in manufacturing states. It became part of the mantra of the 1996 campaign, during which the president and vice president warned in every speech of Republican assaults on ''Medicare, Medicaid, education and the environment.''Mr. Gore's fervor won him friends among environmentalists even as he alienated Congressional Republicans and many in the business community. While he secured noteworthy successes -- particularly on air quality, the designation of more than three million acres as untouchable national monuments and a continued moratorium on oil drilling offshore and in the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge -- his record was not without failures. Blocked by Congress, the administration failed to impose the higher mileage standards that Mr. Gore sought for automobiles. In another defeat, Mr. Clinton ignored Mr. Gore's advice and signed a spending bill that permitted the clear-cutting of certain Western forests. Three months after Mr. Clinton signed the bill, Mr. Gore told a group of environmentalists that the measure was the ''biggest mistake of the first term.''Perhaps the most significant environmental battle of the past eight years arose on Mr. Gore's signature issue, global warming. A 1997 worldwide conference in Kyoto, Japan, on reducing climate-altering gases was in danger of collapsing because of discord between industrialized countries and the developing world about how quickly and how sharply to reduce the output of greenhouse gasses. The Senate was already on record, 95-0, as opposing any agreement that held advanced nations to higher standards than developing ones. The United States delegation to the talks was making no progress, despite prodding from Mr. Gore by telephone. Mr. Gore's aides unanimously urged him to keep his distance from what was shaping up as a failure and a humiliating blow to his prestige. He overrode their advice and flew to Japan, where he told developing nations he understood their concerns and instructed American negotiators to reach a deal at all costs.''Kyoto was a shining moment for Al Gore,'' said Gregory Wetstone of the Natural Resources Defense Council. ''He disregarded the passionate requests of his staff that he steer clear of an international meeting that everyone thought was going to be a train wreck and jumped right in to work on what we all see as a huge problem.''Not everyone saw it that way. Congress has refused to even consider ratifying the Kyoto pact and the United States has taken no significant action since the 1997 conference to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. And global warming remains a contentious political issue. Governor Bush and his surrogates use Mr. Gore's position as a weapon against him in states dependent on automobile manufacturing and coal production; Mr. Gore issues warnings that Mr. Bush's industry-friendly policies could devastate the earth's fragile ecology.''The certainty, the absoluteness with which he states his position is frightening,'' said Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, a global-warming skeptic and sponsor of the Senate resolution that undercut Mr. Gore's position in Kyoto. ''He's so absolutely sure he knows what's best.''His Russian ConnectionMore than any previous vice president, Mr. Gore was granted ministerial power by President Clinton. In April 1993, Mr. Clinton deputized him to oversee much of American policy on Russia and the former Soviet Union. The mechanism was a panel that became known as the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission. The relationship between Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin remains a subject of much debate today. Republicans have harshly criticized the vice president about a confidential 1995 agreement between Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin that allowed Russia to export a large cache of conventional weapons to Iran. The deal appeared to undercut a law, co-sponsored by Mr. Gore when he was a senator, that required economic sanctions against countries that transfer arms to countries that sponsor terrorism, including Iran. The early years of the Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission yielded undeniable benefits, along with controversy. The two men sped the removal of nuclear weapons from Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan, discussed the privatization of much of Russian state industry, supervised the conversion of some Russian military enterprises to civilian work and took early steps toward establishment of free markets and the rule of law. Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin furthered cooperation between the United States and Russia in space; their relationship helped avert a trade war in 1996 over frozen chicken parts. The process throughout was fraught with missteps, charges of corruption and Russian backsliding on commitments to reform. The Gore-Chernomyrdin channel was abruptly closed in March 1998, when Boris Yeltsin dismissed Mr. Chernomyrdin. But Mr. Gore's close ties to Mr. Chernomyrdin came into play again a year later when the United States was seeking an end to the latest Balkan conflict. Mr. Chernomyrdin was named Moscow's special envoy to Belgrade, with the task of trying to persuade Slobodan Milosevic to withdraw his troops from Kosovo. Mr. Gore and Mr. Chernomyrdin met late into the night at Mr. Gore's residence, helping to fashion a diplomatic strategy, ultimately successful, to force Mr. Milosevic to back down. Junior Partner to President? Throughout much of American history, the vice president has served chiefly as a reminder of presidential mortality. These eight years have proved another way of looking at the job. Mr. Clinton granted Mr. Gore broad power in areas of his expertise, and Mr. Gore applied it. His list of achievements was long, according to administration officials and outside experts. It was in large measure Mr. Gore's advocacy that moved Mr. Clinton to give the Food and Drug Administration authority to regulate tobacco as a drug and to restrict marketing of cigarettes to minors. (The agency's authority was struck down this year by the Supreme Court, which said such power resides only in Congress.)Mr. Gore demolished Ross Perot in a debate on the North American Free Trade Agreement and helped secure passage of the trade deal over the objections of many Democrats in Congress. The Federal Communications Commission, largely at the urging of the vice president, adopted a tax in 1996 on telecommunications companies to pay for wiring classrooms to the Internet. Mr. Gore's commitment to breast cancer research led to a doubling of federal spending on breast cancer research, prevention and treatment, to $599 million last year, according to the vice president's office. He pushed President Clinton to declare 40 million acres of public lands roadless areas and promoted the use of the Antiquities Act to set aside more acreage in the lower 48 states than any other administration.''It is hard to think of another administration where the president and vice president were almost peers,'' said Professor John J. Pitney, professor of government at Claremont McKenna College in California. ''These are two people who genuinely working as partners, albeit a very senior and a junior partner.''But for all his influence, the vice president seems destined to be remembered as much for his political shortcomings as for his substantive achievements. He began the administration as the cigar-store Indian, standing inertly behind the president's right shoulder. That image was replaced by one of him at a Buddhist temple in California, symbolizing the fund-raising excesses of 1996. His most memorable utterance was his declaration, on the day the House of Representatives impeached the president for perjury and obstruction of justice, that Mr. Clinton would be remembered as ''one of our greatest presidents.''''When you are weighing presidential skills, there are several things you have to look at,'' Mr. Hess, the presidential scholar, said. ''Does he have a vision for the country? Does he have the psychological wellness, the temperament for the office? Does he have organizational skills? Can he communicate?''Does he? Can he?''Frankly,'' Mr. Hess said, ''after eight years, I'm not sure.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENCY

Under fire from environmental organizations and from his opponent, Representative Rick A. Lazio yesterday stopped broadcasting a radio advertisement that criticized Hillary Rodham Clinton for supporting an environmental treaty on global warming. Mr. Lazio abruptly removed the ad as his campaign was pulled deeper into a bitter dispute with Mrs. Clinton over another issue -- Muslim-American support for her campaign. A New York official of the American Muslim Alliance accused Mr. Lazio of hypocrisy for soliciting campaign donations from him more than a dozen times in the last several months. Criticism about both issues seemed to throw his campaign into confusion by day's end. Mr. Lazio, scrambling to try to explain his views on the global warming treaty, known as the Kyoto Protocol, and on the money dispute, had his driver pull over last night at a gas station on his way to a dinner in Queens and climbed into the reporters'  van following him to spend six minutes answering questions. Lazio campaign officials decided to stop broadcasting the radio advertisement after Mrs. Clinton and several prominent environmental groups, including one that endorsed both candidates, defended the treaty and accused Mr. Lazio of distorting its intent. The Kyoto treaty, which was signed by the United States in 1998 but has not yet been ratified by the Senate, requires countries to reduce consumption of oil and other fossil fuels to help fight global warming. Many Republicans, including Mr. Lazio, have expressed concerns about the treaty because some of the world's biggest polluters, including China and India, have not signed it.  Opponents of the treaty fear many large industries would relocate from the United States to nonsigning nations if the treaty is ratified. By early evening, though, the environmental issue had been overshadowed by the latest round of recriminations in the candidates' feud over Muslim support. Mr. Lazio has repeatedly attacked Mrs. Clinton for attending a fund-raiser organized last June by the American Muslim Alliance chapter in Massachusetts. Last week, she returned $50,000 in contributions collected at the event -- donations Mr. Lazio characterized as ''blood money.''In interviews on the telephone and at his home yesterday in Jericho on Long Island, Faroque A. Khan, the leader of the group's New York chapter, said he had received, on average, two solicitation letters a week from the Lazio campaign since Mr. Lazio entered the Senate race in May. He has even received a Lazio bumper sticker in the mail. Mr. Khan produced several of the mailings, the most recent of which was dated Oct. 23. All of them appear to be general mailings, sent out by the campaign. In the most recent letter, Mr. Lazio says that Mrs. Clinton has ''flip-flopped'' on the issue of terrorism and ''shrugged off her warm embrace'' of Suha Arafat. ''It is going to cost him the election,'' Mr. Khan said. ''He tells us that Hillary is terrible and horrible for taking our money, and then he asks for it himself. He has really energized and solidified thousands of people who wouldn't have gone to the polls otherwise.''Mrs. Clinton's campaign, which throughout the day had tried to divert attention from the Muslim American dispute to focus on her chosen issue of the day -- Social Security -- last night echoed the criticism by Mr. Khan.''You are left wondering six days before the election what Rick Lazio believes or whether he believes anything at all,'' said Howard Wolfson, her campaign spokesman. ''Did he think he could get away with this without anybody noticing?''But inside the press van last night, Mr. Lazio said the fund-raising mailing was a form letter, and described Mr. Khan's criticism as false.''We have sent out 18 million pieces of mail,'' Mr. Lazio said. ''I'm sure a number of those who have received that mail have been supporters of Hillary Clinton. As far as I know and I understand, we have not received a dime from any person that supports terrorism as a legitimate political tool.''Earlier in the day, Mr. Lazio, in campaign stops that focused on an appeal to Jewish voters, declared directly that he did not believe in the creation of a Palestinian state, suggesting that it would not endure and would upset the stability of the region. Mr. Lazio has criticized Mrs. Clinton for saying she supported the creation of a Palestinian state before, but today he directly questioned the wisdom of a step that had been advocated by a number of Israeli  leaders, at least before this latest round of violence, as a way of constructing a lasting peace agreement.''If you ask me what my personal opinion is, I am not a supporter of a Palestinian state,'' Mr. Lazio said after speaking to boys at the Yeshiva of South Shore in Hewlett, on Long Island. He added: ''I believe that that's going to be in the end up to the people and the government of Israel to agree. But if you ask me what my personal opinion -- I don't believe in one.''Mr. Lazio said that he did not believe that ''full statehood'' would be ''sustainable from a security standpoint for Israel.''As Mr. Lazio spoke, Assemblyman Dov Hikind, a Brooklyn Democrat who is a leading Orthodox Jew, and whose support had been courted by both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Lazio, said that he had decided to stay neutral in the race. Mr. Hikind has had a history of endorsing Republicans in recent years and had been critical of Mrs. Clinton. Mr. Hikind would not say what caused him not to endorse; however, it came after a week in which Mrs. Clinton had come under attack by some Jewish New Yorkers for accepting and then returning donations from American Muslims.''I am convinced that should Hillary Clinton get elected -- as well as Lazio -- that they will effectively represent the interests of New York, specifically Jewish New Yorkers,'' he said. ''I feel very good that way, in spite of her past record that angers so many of us, and I've expressed that anger directly at Hillary.''Mrs. Clinton, in an appearance at  the Riverdale Senior Center yesterday afternoon, would not discuss Mr. Hikind's decision. She also would not respond to claims by several Muslim American organizations on Tuesday that Mr. Lazio had introduced racism and bigotry into the campaign by criticizing her support among Muslim Americans.''I will leave that to others to characterize,'' she said. Asked about her views on a Palestinian state, she said that she does not support a unilateral declaration of statehood, but would support the creation of such an entity if it were part of a comprehensive peace agreement between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Her opponent and others have noted that she advocated an independent state before she became a candidate for public office. Mrs. Clinton also criticized Mr. Lazio for broadcasting the environmental ad, insisting he shared her support for the Kyoto agreement. The advertisement accuses Mrs. Clinton of backing a ''radical environmental treaty that would wipe out thousands of manufacturing jobs in New York.''Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and Larry Rockefeller, two leaders of the New York League of Conservation Voters, and members of the Sierra Club, both of which have endorsed Mrs. Clinton, said yesterday that Mr. Lazio told them in interviews during the endorsement process that he would vote for ratification of the treaty. The National League of Conservation Voters, a separate organization based in Washington that endorsed both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Lazio, said Mr. Lazio never promised to ratify the treaty, but a spokeswoman said he clearly ''supported the premise'' of the pact. Mr. Lazio pulled the ad after the Washington group immediately sent him a letter ''strongly requesting'' that it be withdrawn and indicating it ''runs counter to the intent and spirit'' of the group's endorsement, according to Betsy Loyless, the league's political director. Ms. Loyless said there were board members who would have pushed to revoke the endorsement if the ads continued to run.''We feel strongly about this issue and applaud Mrs. Clinton,'' Ms. Loyless said. Mr. Lazio said the ad ''was discontinued out of respect'' for the league.''My position on Kyoto is consistent and well known,'' Mr. Lazio said. ''I have always said that everybody needs to be in the tent: that we can't create what I call sort of a polluter pass to certain nations like China or India and hold America to a different standard.''Mr. Lazio said he had no regrets about the language used to attack the bill in the ad, even when a reporter noted that in September he had described the Kyoto Protocol as ''a laudable attempt to address global warming,'' even as he said the treaty could be improved. ''The final product ended up being something that I couldn't' support,'' he said.

Moving into the final leg of her campaign for Senate, Hillary Rodham Clinton sprinted from Buffalo to Manhattan to Long Island today, trying to do in New York State what Al Gore has studiously avoided doing across the nation: run on the record of the Clinton administration. Looking fatigued and swigging bottled water to fight a dry cough, Mrs. Clinton disparaged Representative Rick A. Lazio at every opportunity, describing her opponent's campaign as ''a charade'' intended to hide what she called his conservative and caustic ideology. But even as she attacked Mr. Lazio today for running a ''campaign of insults,'' she released the latest in a parade of notably negative advertisements, this one featuring a clip of Mr. Lazio confronting her in their first debate, demanding that she sign an agreement on campaign financing. At a moment in campaigns that politicians typically use to sum up the case for their candidacy, Mrs. Clinton repeatedly returned today to the record of her husband's years as president. While she was sparing in mentioning the president himself, her eagerness to affix her fortunes to his administration during the most-watched stretch of a campaign contrasted sharply with Mr. Gore, the other Democrat who has been seeking to emerge from Mr. Clinton's shadow and has not wanted the president to campaign with him.''We've had eight good years: people are working, people are employed, people are buying homes, unemployment is down, and I think the Clinton-Gore administration has done a darn good job on the economy,'' the first lady shouted, her voice hoarse, at a raucous labor rally at a hall in the Manhattan Center on West 34th Street. ''My opponent is saying eight years is enough. I don't know what planet he's on, but I think that eight years has not been enough.''''I remember what it was like in 1992 -- it has taken eight years to get this country going in the right direction,'' Mrs. Clinton said. She got so wrapped up that she even invoked the signature theme of her husband's 1992 campaign, telling an audience of students to ''put people first.''Mrs. Clinton's aides said today that the president would come to New York to attend three get-out-the-vote rallies Saturday, in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Harlem. Mrs. Clinton will not be with him at those rallies, though an aide said they might well make several joint appearances before Tuesday. Mr. Clinton also plans to be in New York on Tuesday to listen to the election returns with his wife. Mrs. Clinton's remarks came on a day when both candidates moved into a high gear of campaigning, each setting a frenetic pace -- in their travels, the release of new advertisements, and a seemingly endless parade of e-mail attacks -- that aides to both said would continue through Monday. And once again, much of the battle was engaged upstate. Mrs. Clinton also moved to take advantage of what her aides argued was a mistake by Mr. Lazio, whose campaign released and then pulled back a radio advertisement that attacked her support of the Kyoto treaty on global warming. The advertisement, which was broadcast only upstate, described the pact as ''radical'' and suggested that it would cost jobs in a part of the state where the economy has had some difficulty. Mr. Lazio dropped the advertisement under pressure from environmental groups, and amid concern by some Republicans that the episode could undercut his effort to present himself as a moderate Republican. Mrs. Clinton mentioned the incident today as she said Mr. Lazio was running a negative campaign and had ''no plan'' to address economic problems upstate.''My opponent has no plan to bring and attract and keep good jobs here in upstate New York,'' she said. ''And in the absence of a plan, which he has been promising for a week, he put up a misleading and inaccurate radio ad as a smoke screen to try to cover up the fact that he has no plan for the upstate economy.''Even as she attacked Mr. Lazio for attacking her, her campaign released one of the toughest advertisements of the contest, including a clip of the moment in which Mr. Lazio walked from his lectern over to hers during their debate in Buffalo and demanded that she sign a written agreement restricting use of soft money in the campaign. ''Right here, right here, sign it,'' Mr. Lazio is shown saying to Mrs. Clinton. The confrontational scene was repeatedly played on television at the time, and aides to both candidates believe that it hurt him, particularly among women. Mrs. Clinton learned of a bombing in Jerusalem while touring a supermarket warehouse in Buffalo. She retired to a private office and spoke on the telephone before coming out and condemning the attack and calling on Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, to put back in jail the terrorists he had freed in recent weeks. Mrs. Clinton acknowledged that she had no idea whether any of those people were involved in the bombing but said, ''It just makes common sense that if you are committed to ending violence and terrorism, you would not let out of prison people who are known to be terrorists.''Mrs. Clinton's repeated efforts today to run on the Clinton administration's record came after 16 months in which she has often seemed unsure about how closely to associate herself with a politician who remains one of the most popular Democrats with New York voters. Mr. Clinton has been only an occasional visitor to New York since she started her campaign. But today, speaking to union members, the most solid kind of Democratic audiences, the first lady shed any ambivalence about the association. ''I'm proud of the fact that I am committed to continuing the policies of the past eight years,'' she said.

Vice President Al Gore has labored long and hard to make environmental protection his signature issue, but in the closing days of the presidential campaign, he is finding himself in an unexpected position. With the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, on one side and the Republican candidate, Gov. George W. Bush, on the other, Mr. Gore is being forced to defend himself as neither a heretic nor a zealot. That dynamic has made it more difficult for Mr. Gore to delineate the deep differences over the environment between himself and Mr. Bush.  Indeed, on oil drilling, pollution control, global warming and timber policy, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have offered starkly different views. Mr. Bush is emphasizing state regulations, voluntary guidelines and greater access to public lands for mining, logging, grazing and drilling. Mr. Gore is pressing for more federal control, mandatory guidelines and more protection for public lands. At the same time, the debate has raised questions about how the support that each candidate has voiced for the environment might translate into practice. Mr. Gore, for example, is being backed by most major environmental groups, but in other quarters, his past statement that environmental protection should become ''the central organizing principle for civilization'' is being portrayed by his opponents as evidence of either betrayal or bad judgment.''This administration tries to take credit for our economy, but they seem to have forgotten what makes it turn,'' Mr. Bush said over the summer, in outlining what he has portrayed as a more practical view. ''Even today, in our new, high-tech economy, America runs on oil and gas and coal gained from the earth and water held behind our dams.''Mr. Gore still clearly sees the environment as a winning issue, and his campaign has tried to focus attention on Mr. Bush's environmental record in Texas, which Gore aides say  should raise deep doubts about the governor's commitment to protection. ''When it comes to the environment, I've never given up, I've never turned back, and I never will,'' Mr. Gore said at recent rallies. Mr. Nader, with his calls for an end to all logging in the national forests and his insistence that all international trading agreements should include environmental protections, has succeeded in driving home the notion that Mr. Gore's true colors are far less green than he has made out.''Al Gore is suffering from election-year delusion if he thinks his record on the environment is anything to be proud of,'' Mr. Nader said recently. ''He should be held accountable by voters for eight years of principles betrayed and promises broken.''Even though the Clinton administration has disappointed them on some issues, such as its failure to tighten automobile fuel-economy,  most leading environmentalists have rallied to Mr. Gore. He, more than anyone else, they argue, deserves credit for the administration's environmental achievements. Furthermore, as president, they reason, he would finally have the freedom to put his own agenda in place. With Mr. Nader himself admitting that he has no chance of winning election, all three of the major environmental organizations that endorse presidential candidates have signed up for Mr. Gore, even while expressing what Brent Blackwelder, who heads Friends of the Earth, called ''environmental disappointments with Gore.''Carl Pope, the executive director of the Sierra Club, the country's largest environmental organization, wrote recently in urging members to cast their lot with Mr. Gore: ''When Clinton and Gore were elected eight years ago, many environmentalists thought that internal revolution would be handed to them. It was not, and frustrated hopes have left many in a grumpy mood, as pessimistic about the possibilities of enlightened governance as any libertarian Texan. But past disappointments should not blind us to the historic opportunity before us to clean up our air and water, heal our cities and protect our natural treasures. Real people, forests and wild creatures will be significantly better or worse off depending on what happens Nov. 7.''In their public statements, both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have cast themselves as committed to environmental protection, but in laying out their views, they have left little doubt that they would move in very different directions. Mr. Bush has called for ''a new era'' in which he, as president, would ''maintain a strong federal environmental role but return significant authority to states and local communities.''Mr. Gore has sees the federal government as the dominant force in the quest for environmental protection. He has called for a ban on logging in all remaining roadless areas of the national forests, including the Tongass in Alaska, a position that goes beyond even a draft plan being reviewed within the Clinton administration. That approach -- along with another Gore-backed effort that has set aside millions of additional acres of federal lands as national monuments as a barrier against future development -- has been sharply criticized by Mr. Bush, who has accused the Clinton Administration of riding  roughshod over local opposition. Perhaps the starkest difference between the two major candidates in the environmental arena has been their stance on the Kyoto Treaty, the 1997 pact that was designed to reduce emissions of climate-altering gases blamed for global warming. Mr. Gore helped broker the accord, and he has remained a strong proponent of its ratification by the United States Senate. Mr. Bush has said that global warming poses a problem but that there is not yet sufficient evidence to point to a solution. He opposes the Kyoto Treaty in large part because it requires industrialized nations to move more quickly than developing ones in reducing outputs of so-called greenhouse gases, an approach that Mr. Bush has called ''ineffective, inadequate and unfair to America.''The two main candidates have also offered very different ways to combat higher gas prices. Mr. Bush has called for increased exploration for domestic sources of energy, and has said that as president he would allow oil drilling to begin in parts of the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge. Mr. Gore, who would put a higher priority on energy conservation, has vowed to oppose drilling in the refuge. THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE ENVIRONMENT

Polar bears, their white coats tinged with yellow after a summer of fasting on the tundra, are gathering here on the western shores of the Hudson Bay, waiting for sea ice that once again will free them from land, allowing them to hunt seals. Almost imperceptibly, this timeless tableau on treeless salt marshes is changing: the ''Lords of the Arctic,'' North America's largest land carnivores, are 10 percent thinner and have 10 percent fewer cubs than they did 20 years ago. The culprit, scientists and residents here said, is climate change. Today, on average, ice melts off the Hudson Bay three weeks earlier than 25 years ago. That means three weeks less each year for the polar bears to capture and gorge on seal pups. And so the bay's 1,200 polar bears, the world's southernmost polar bear population, are fast becoming worldwide symbols of climate change. In mid-November, when the first adolescent male bears gingerly test the new ice here, protesters in The Hague are to dress in sad-faced polar bear costumes and stage ''die-ins'' at opening sessions of negotiations over the Kyoto Protocol, a three-year-old international treaty intended to cut greenhouse gases.''The polar bear is coming to symbolize the disappearing north, the end of the kind of climate we all grew up with,'' said Peter Tabuns, executive director of Greenpeace Canada, which has 120,000 members. ''The habitat that polar bears depend on is being wiped out. That is pretty strong stuff, emotionally and intellectually.''Ursus maritimus, or bear of the sea, is the kind of charismatic mammal favored for promoting environmental causes. Fascinated by these ''gentle giants,'' 10,000 tourists from around the world trek every fall to this northern village of 1,100 residents, reachable only by train or plane. On the main street, where one not-so-gentle giant killed a local man in 1984, affluent visitors flock to the Lazy Bear Lodge and Cafe, the Bear Country Inn and the Great White Bear Gift Shop. Bristling with cameras, tourists roll out daily in tundra buggies, heated, elevated, bear-proof viewing mobiles, or lift off in sleek helicopters, with bears painted on the noses. Every spring, bears prowl ice floes, smashing open snow lairs that seals create over breathing holes. Gorging on pups, a 1,200-pound adult male bear can pack as much as 150 pounds of seal meat into his stomach.''It's the big bear pigout,'' said Jane Waterman, a University of Central Florida biologist who has worked here with Dr. Ian Stirling, the lead polar bear researcher in Manitoba. ''When they come off the sea ice, they are big bags of lard with feet.''But by all indicators, ice in the western Hudson Bay is breaking up earlier as temperatures rise.''The trend for earlier breakup is really important for polar bears, because the spring is when polar bears store most of their energy,'' said Dr. Stirling, a research biologist for the Canadian Wildlife Service. ''If bears are only able to feed for two weeks less than 20 years ago, that means two weeks less energy, two weeks less fat than 20 years ago.''Since 1950, temperatures here have risen by half a degree Fahrenheit every decade. For this century, scientists project that temperatures will rise by 4 to 11 degrees. If trends stay unchanged, within 30 years this sub-Arctic region of treeless tundra could shift to New England-style temperate leafy forest, according to a climate change model prepared by Environment Canada, a federal agency.''One of the forecasts is that we will eventually lose ice in the Hudson Bay,'' said Dr. Stirling, who has studied bears here for 30 years. ''If that happens, we may lose bears in the bay.''Canada and Russia will be the two nations most affected by global warming in this century, predicted a report issued in September by the World Wide Fund for Nature, a private group. With a polar bear staring from the cover, the report predicted that in this province, about half the current habitats would be altered or lost, and that nearly half of animal and plant species would have to migrate northward at the rate of half a mile a year to survive. Arctic temperatures will rise over the next century by 5 to 18 degrees Fahrenheit, according to a third Canadian report this year, titled ''Climate Change and Canada's National Park System.''It examined how climate change would affect Arctic parks, including Wapusk National Park in Churchill, one of the three largest polar bear maternity denning sites in the world. The federal scientists concluded: ''The open water season will increase by 90 days, forcing ringed seal and polar bear populations further north.''All the studies note that there are clear trends of climate change, despite year-to-year variations. People who live here know all about the shift. Summers have doubled from two months to four, said Peter Scott, science coordinator of the Churchill Northern Studies Center, a research and tourism center.''We are seeing changes with longer falls and earlier springs,'' agreed Mayor Mike Spence, who has lived all of his 40 years here. Nostalgic for childhood winters, he said, ''Back in the 60's and early 70's, it seemed like we got a storm a day.''Up the coast, in Inuit communities like Arviat, mothers have complained that their children are developing a summer skin rash for which there is no name in their language, Inuktitut. Nurses at the hospital here identified the rash as sunburn.''The temperatures were a lot lower when I was growing up,'' Christopher Hart, a 32-year-old tugboat deckhand, said at the international port here. ''We used to go snowmobiling through the end of May. Now, we will be lucky if we get to go in early May.''Onshore, at the port headquarters, a wall plaque reveals how the shipping season has expanded since the port opened in 1929. Under the heading ''The First Grain Ship to Open the Season,'' the first ship to dock here in July appears in 1950. From 1980 to 1996, July dockings remained rare, accounting for four of 17 first arrivals. But starting in 1997, every first arrival has been in July, including this year, a record-setting July 11. Over the last 30 years, the expanse of sea ice remaining in the Hudson Bay on July 15 has decreased by one-third, according to satellite survey research by the Canadian Ice Service, another federal agency. Reaching further back, a study published recently in the journal Science says records kept by managers of the Hudson Bay Company in this region indicate that 19th-century fur traders faced about three more weeks of river ice than river users today.''Climate change is a two-edge sword,'' said Gary Doer, Manitoba's premier. ''It helps the port. But for those of us who like to see the beauty of the belugas and the polar bears, we would like to see it stop.''About 300 years ago, British fur traders built this village at the mouth of the Churchill River, a summer calving site for thousands of beluga whales. In the fall, the town stands in the migratory path of the world's largest concentration of polar bears, now increasingly cranky after losing three pounds a day since June. Wildlife wardens, armed with noisemakers, tranquilizer guns and baited bear traps on wheels, patrol a polar bear exclusion zone. Along this unfenced 3.5-mile perimeter, ''Polar Bear Alert'' signs warn visitors of the dangers of walking unarmed on the tundra. At the airport, the polar bear jail has 28 temporary cells.''I was up at 1:30 this morning,'' Wayde Roberts, the acting provincial conservation officer, said, weary after responding to another night of calls to the town hot line (675-BEAR). His November statistics show how polar bear moods reflect ice conditions. In 1999, when the bay froze three weeks earlier than normal, he handled only 62 bear calls. In 1998, when the bay froze three weeks later than normal, bear calls nearly doubled, hitting 115.

President Clinton called today for new federal regulations limiting power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide, a gas thought to cause global climate change, through a system similar to the rules now in place for pollutants that cause smog and acid rain. It would be the first time that federal regulations specifically controlled emissions of carbon dioxide, the main so-called greenhouse gas. At the same time, Mr. Clinton called for similar controls on emissions of mercury, another pollutant that is given off by some power plants but is not regulated by the air pollution laws. Any such expansion of pollution rules would probably require action by Congress, where there is significant opposition to the idea. But the administration contends that without this kind of step, a global treaty to reduce the risks of global warming will probably fail. Mr. Clinton proposed a ''cap and trade'' system, under which the government would set a national limit on emissions, and divide pollution allowances among the power plants. Companies could cut their emissions enough to stay within their allowances. Or they could cut even more of their emissions and sell the leftover allowances to other companies that might have cut their emissions less extensively and therefore needed more allowances. The idea, a market-based approach applied successfully to other forms of air pollution since the early 1990's, is meant to get the desired overall reductions at the least cost. But many in Congress oppose any unilateral steps by the United States to regulate greenhouse gases, as well as opposing the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 climate change treaty negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, that the United States has signed but never submitted to the Senate for ratification. The United States is by far the world's biggest emitter of carbon dioxide. Mr. Clinton's proposal comes as United Nations members are gathering at The Hague to discuss ways to implement the Kyoto Protocol. ''The scientific consensus is clear: the earth is warming and there is strong evidence that human activity is part of the reason why,'' the president said in an address broadcast today over the Internet so international delegates could have access to it. The speech is posted at the White House Web site, www .whitehouse. gov. The system is already in place for sulfur oxides, which cause acid rain, and is in place in some states for nitrogen oxides, which cause smog and acid rain. Mr. Clinton did not provide any numbers for the amount that emissions of mercury or carbon dioxide should be cut. Mr. Clinton also did not specify what power companies could do to generate allowances for sale. However, technicians said they could burn fuel more efficiently or switch from coal to natural gas, which produces less carbon dioxide. That also would cut emissions of mercury and other pollutants. The power companies could also plant trees or pay to prevent tree cutting, which has the effect of taking carbon dioxide out of the air and storing it in the wood. Some environmentalists have advocated giving carbon dioxide credits only for increasing the efficiency of energy use, and thus reducing the amount of fuel that must be burned. Going into the negotiations at The Hague, the United States delegation will argue for giving credit for agricultural practices that keep more carbon in the soil.

After four years of tortuous negotiations, a treaty aimed at curtailing global warming faces its greatest obstacles yet in the next two weeks as officials from around the world meet in the Netherlands to tussle over the fine print. The pivotal talks, which begin today in The Hague, come on the heels of new scientific reports with the strongest evidence so far that people, mainly through the burning of fossil fuels, have contributed substantially to a warming trend that could disrupt weather patterns, ecosystems and agriculture around the world. The treaty, called the Kyoto Protocol, requires industrialized nations to reduce releases of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, which trap heat in the atmosphere. It has been signed by representatives of more than 100 countries, including the United States, but cannot take effect until a substantial number of the industrial nations ratify it. So far, none have done so. Most important would be the approval of the United States, far and away the world's largest producer of heat-trapping gases, and without whose participation, specialists say, the effort is bound to falter. Even if the details can be worked out over the next two weeks, the presidential election may have further clouded the accord's future. Gov. George W. Bush has questioned the science pointing to a warming trend caused by human activity, and he opposes the treaty, which bears the imprint of the Clinton administration -- and particularly of Vice President Al Gore, who flew to the pivotal session in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997 to prod feuding delegates into agreement on key points. Mr. Bush has said, however, that he would support a requirement of some reductions in carbon dioxide emissions from power plants. If Mr. Gore wins, some treaty experts say that in a few years he might be able to build sufficient support in the Senate to approve the treaty, but it would be an uphill fight, requiring the consent of 67 of 100 members of the Senate, which with the current election is close to evenly divided. In other countries, negotiators say, there is a great enough sense of urgency to give the sessions at The Hague a chance of success. Pressure for action in Europe to reduce fuel use has intensified partly because of recent spikes in already high fuel prices and a string of devastating floods and storms that have been cited as a taste of what may lie ahead if the world's climate is disrupted. Other countries are feeling pressure, too, if indirectly.''It's the bottom of the ninth, and the bases are truly loaded,'' said John W. Ashe, a negotiator and ambassador to the United Nations from Antigua and Barbuda, a Caribbean country of 67,000. Island nations, which are vulnerable should the melting glaciers and polar icecaps raise sea levels, have been some of the most passionate proponents of the treaty. ''It's time for countries to step up to the plate.''If enacted, the treaty would commit industrialized nations over the next 8 to 12 years to reduce their emissions by at least 5 percent below the levels of 1990, the year chosen as the benchmark. Developing countries, including giants like China and India, would pledge to seek emissions limits in the future, but would not be legally bound to do so. These countries emit far less greenhouse pollution than industrial nations now, but are expected to surpass many of them within two decades. Many American senators say this lets the developing nations off the hook. Even as negotiations over the treaty have dragged on, emission levels of many of the world's big producers of greenhouse gases have continued to rise, particularly as economies have grown. This in turn has increased the pressure on negotiators for cheap solutions that are the least politically risky. The United States, for instance, is producing nearly 22 percent more warming emissions now than in 1990, while under the treaty it would be required to reduce those gases by 7 percent below 1990 levels between 2008 and 2012. In fact, energy experts say, of the 34 industrial nations involved, only Germany and Britain have a good chance of meeting their emissions targets, and they are likely to do so because of policies that are being pursued in any case. Britain, for instance, is closing obsolete coal mines, and Germany is dismantling the grime-belching factories left behind during Communist rule in the east. As a result, private environmental groups say there are many efforts under way to increase loopholes in the proposed treaty. ''They are trying to renegotiate the meaning of the numbers, making it easier to meet the targets,'' said Alden Meyer, director of government relations for the Union of Concerned Scientists, a private environmental group in Washington. ''The result could be we'll have a treaty, but the atmosphere would still be suffering.''As it stands, even the current treaty is seen by many climate experts and ecologists as baby steps toward addressing the effects of a century in which fuels were burned with abandon. And much remains to be done before it can take effect. The United States disagrees sharply with other countries on central points of the accord -- like how to penalize nations that fail to reach targets and whether to give credit for shifts away from coal and oil that involve alternatives like nuclear plants, hydroelectric dams or new systems that burn a dirty fuel, coal, with fewer emissions. The United States, which potentially stands to face the greatest economic cost from cutting emissions, is one of several countries that think nothing should be rejected out of hand. It, for instance, along with Australia and other countries with lots of open space, prefers allowing more credits for efforts to sop up carbon dioxide by planting trees, while more crowded European countries want to limit this option. Such disagreements and the politics surrounding the conference, many participants in the negotiations say, are helping to make the forthcoming sessions in The Hague a make-or-break effort. The thousands of delegates and observers gathering in the Netherlands represent agendas as varied as the geography, economies and cultures of the countries from which they come. There are Washington lobbyists representing oil-producing kingdoms who have succeeded for years in slowing the treaty with challenges aimed in part at compensating their clients once the world begins to wean itself away from petroleum. There are European lawyers representing low-lying island nations and those of other poor countries seeking a range of payments to help fend off rising seas and to absorb other effects of climate change. There are environmental campaigners who plan to build a dike of sandbags around the conference hall to illustrate the threat of future flooding. And in the middle of all this are more than 160 national delegations, many of which have formed negotiating blocs. The list of differences over differences and details is enough to dizzy the most seasoned negotiator, participants said. The 15 nations of the European Union, pressed by an influential Green movement, are insisting on strict limits on how much credit a country can gain by investing in emissions-cutting projects abroad. Their goal is to have most cuts occur on home soil, through increased energy efficiency or by replacing old coal-fired power plants with clean-energy sources like windmills. By contrast, the United States seeks to be able to spend money on emissions reductions wherever they can be done most cheaply, and to harness market forces through a global trading system for carbon dioxide similar to an American system for reducing sulfur pollution that causes acid rain. Another key dispute is over how much forests can be used to gain credits for absorbing carbon dioxide. Environmental groups and the Europeans oppose large-scale use of this tactic, saying that planting trees where others have been cut down results in no net carbon reduction and that preserving one forest may simply prompt the cutting of another forest somewhere else. Also, critics say, forests are not a secure repository because the carbon dioxide can easily be freed up d by fires, assault from pests or as climate shifts occur. The United States, in turn, has criticized the European position on penalties for failure to meet targets. Europe proposes a simple cash payment for each ton of carbon dioxide missed. But American negotiators, and some environmental campaigners, say this would allow nations simply to buy their way out of legal obligations.''Some rivers in Europe have schemes where you pay to pollute,'' said Fred Krupp, the executive director of Environmental Defense, a private group. ''On this point,'' he said, ''they are for ripping the teeth out of'' the treaty. The United States has proposed penalties in the form of larger subsequent cuts in greenhouse gases -- essentially payment with interest. But critics say that this would simply put off the emissions reductions. To take effect, the protocol must be ratified by any combination of industrialized countries with combined 1990 greenhouse emissions of 55 percent of the industrial world's total. This could happen without the United States, which accounted for 36 percent of total emissions in 1990. The European Union, with 24.2 percent of emissions, has said that it might seek an alliance with Russia, at 17.4 percent, and Japan (8.5 percent), and so reach the threshold for the treaty to go into force. Still, many participants say, the effort is bound to falter if the world's largest source of greenhouse pollutants does not sign on. For now, at least, the leader of the American negotiating team, Frank E. Loy, under secretary of state for global affairs, said he is committed to seeking changes in The Hague that produce real cuts in greenhouse gases that are affordable and fair, and thus acceptable to the Senate. In an interview last week, Mr. Loy said that the strengthening scientific evidence behind the greenhouse effect will help build support for the treaty in Congress, as will recent decisions by companies like Ford, Shell, Polaroid and DuPont to press ahead with cuts in greenhouse gas emissions and efforts to create new pollution-free technologies.''With the increasing clarity of the science and increasing participation of the business community,'' he said, ''it gets clearer and clearer that no administration is going to be able to ignore this issue.''

To the Editor:At the Hague Climate Convention (news article, Nov. 13), two parallels between the 1997 Kyoto Protocol on climate and the 1987 Montreal Protocol on ozone are worth considering. In 1987, a fund allowed developing nations to convert their industrial processes. New data several years later led to an accelerated phase-out of ozone-depleting chemicals. As the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports in detail, we have apparently underestimated the rate and the impact of climate change. To ensure continuation of the Kyoto process, delegates can plan steps to consider: ratcheting up the targets and timetables for reducing greenhouse gases, and establishing a ''clean development fund'' to build markets for clean energy technologies. PAUL R. EPSTEIN, M.D.  Boston, Nov. 14, 2000  The writer is associate director, Center for Health and the Global Environment, Harvard Medical School.

As critical talks on a treaty to fight global warming entered a third day here, the Department of Energy issued a study that addresses a main point of contention: whether the United States could do more to reduce its addiction to fossil fuels. In the study, Energy Department analysts say that fairly simple, inexpensive changes in American energy policies -- some already embraced by both presidential aspirants -- could go a long way toward cutting emissions of carbon dioxide, the dominant greenhouse gas. The analysts conclude with three ways that energy use, and thus emissions of carbon dioxide, could be substantially reduced, with almost no harm to the economy: raising standards for energy and fuel efficiency; increasing spending on government and private energy research; and adopting a national trading scheme for carbon dioxide cuts that gives companies a financial incentive to surpass required reductions. The payoff would come not only in reducing greenhouse gases, said a chief author, Dr. Marilyn A. Brown, but also in lower energy bills, less dependence on imported oil and a reduction in power plant and car emissions, which contribute to smog and acid rain. Dr. Brown is deputy director of the energy efficiency and renewable energy program of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. She added, ''There are lots of low-cost and no-cost opportunities that are a great investment.''Dr. Brown was planning to present the work on Thursday for negotiators gathered to debate a proposed international treaty to curtail global warming. But word of the study was already out; the focus was on its contrasts with the negotiating position of the American delegation. Under the treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, by 2012 industrialized countries would cut combined emissions of greenhouse gases more than 5 percent below emissions measured in 1990. So far more than 100 countries have signed the treaty, but no industrialized countries have ratified it. Many countries and environmental groups have complained that the United States has strongly resisted commitment to a gas reductions goal on its home turf. Instead, American negotiators have pressed for industrialized countries to get credit toward emissions targets in exchange for investments made wherever in the world the biggest reductions can be found for the least cost. The United States has felt growing pressure to commit to reductions at home because it is widely perceived as the 800-pound gorilla in the global greenhouse. With 4 percent of the world's population, the United States produces nearly 25 percent of heat-trapping gases. The Energy Department study seemed to offer evidence that plenty could be accomplished at home, negotiators and observers here said.''This shows us that there are huge opportunities to achieve real domestic pollution reductions,'' said Dr. Daniel A. Lashof, a senior scientist for the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private group in New York. ''It shows us there's no reason for the United States to demand loopholes as part of these negotiations.''He added that momentum was building for a core component of the Energy Department proposal: a national system for requiring cuts in carbon dioxide and letting companies that surpass those targets sell the excess credits. This is the same kind of trading system that has sharply -- and without great cost -- lowered emissions of sulfur pollution from power plants over the last decade. Referring to the two combatants still locked in the presidential race, Dr. Lashof said, ''Both Bush and Gore have supported limits on carbon dioxide from power plants with emissions trading.''The analysis, Scenarios for a Clean Energy Future, offered several ways the United States could reduce pollution from fossil fuels. For example, it could encourage utilities to produce at least a small percentage of their electricity with nonpolluting technologies like wind power -- in the way that California now requires car manufacturers to sell some models that produce nearly no pollution. American negotiators said here today that they were all for aggressively cutting greenhouse emissions domestically. But any treaty that forced countries to achieve most cuts at home ''would only increase costs, reduce incentives for innovation and substantially complicate efforts to move forward,'' said David B. Sandalow, an assistant secretary of state for environmental affairs. Still, some American environmental experts thought the United States would pursue domestic cuts.''I can't imagine the United States Congress sending huge amounts of money to Russia or elsewhere to buy emission reductions when there are cost-effective reductions at home,'' said Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Climate Change, based in Washington. ''It only makes sense to do those things first.''

In a shift that is likely to brighten prospects for a global warming treaty, American negotiators at talks here have said the United States would be willing to limit its use of forest projects to reach its target for reducing heat-trapping greenhouse gases. The new stance, signaled in the face of mounting criticism from Europe and private environmental groups, came this weekend, halfway through a contentious two-week session aimed at writing the fine print for the treaty, called the Kyoto Protocol. The treaty was worked out by more than 170 nations in Japan in 1997. If ratified, it would commit three dozen industrialized nations to reduce their combined greenhouse-gas releases by 2012 to at least 5 percent below emissions in 1990, with each country taking a unique target depending on its emissions. But the rules and means to achieve cuts have never been resolved, with this session, called the Sixth Conference of the Parties, intended as the denouement. Many disagreements in these pivotal negotiations have focused on the role of forests as ''sinks,'' in which carbon dioxide, a warming gas flooding the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels and forests, is removed by trees, which store the carbon in wood and soil. The United States, by far the largest emitter of greenhouse gases, calculated last summer that its vast forests, by absorbing up to 300 million tons a year of carbon dioxide, could help it get halfway to its pledged target under the treaty, reducing emissions by 2012 to 7 percent below where they were in 1990. It also wants to get credit for paying for forest-protection and tree-planting projects in other countries. But Europe, too crowded to take advantage of forests, and many private environmental groups say crediting forest growth would allow the United States and other large, forested countries to meet their targets without undertaking the much harder, and potentially costlier, task of reducing greenhouse gases at the source: mainly tailpipes and smokestacks.''This is a major free ride for the U.S., a get-out-of-jail-free card the  likes of which has never been seen,'' said Kert Davies, a representative of  Greenpeace USA lobbying at the talks. Last week, in sharply rejecting a preliminary American proposal for  phasing in the use of forest credits, the European Union described sinks as ''a free gift.''Frank E. Loy, the under secretary of state for global affairs and chief  American negotiator, said forests were one of several treaty components that American negotiators see as essential to any agreement that is both effective and cost-effective -- and that will satisfy a highly skeptical Senate, whose approval the treaty needs.''If an agreement doesn't take into account the fact that forests can act  as a huge source of emissions as well as an important opportunity to reduce emissions, it will be a very unsatisfactory exercise,'' Mr. Loy said. But other American negotiators explained that they were prepared to  compromise on the amount of carbon dioxide absorbed by forests for which a country could receive credit, moving beyond an earlier proposal that would phase in credit for forests from 2008 to 2012.''We are prepared to discount some of the tons that would come through the process,'' one official said. Mr. Loy said the United States was committed to acting aggressively on home turf to curtail emissions, but insisted that there should be flexibility to use every emissions-cutting tool available wherever it could be used most effectively.''We've always thought of sinks as being part of the answer,'' he said.  ''They're not intended to take the place of investments in environmentally sound technologies.''In a news conference late last week, Jos Delbeke, the head of the climate section of the European Commission, said that so far, the American proposal was ''far too vague and far too incomplete'' and would be acceptable only when there were hard numbers showing a clear retreat from large forest credits. Many other disagreements between blocs of countries remained unresolved over the weekend, including whether countries should be able to get credit toward emissions goals for investing in pollution-cutting projects abroad, and whether such projects should include controversial technologies like nuclear power and ''clean coal'' plants -- or forest projects. Environmental campaigners used theatrics to make points. On Saturday, several thousand people from 40 countries built a dike of 50,000 sandbags around the sprawling convention center, meant to highlight one of the perils expected in a warmer world. Scientists predict that continued global warming will disrupt ecosystems and weather patterns and also raise sea levels as glaciers melt. In the lobby, demonstrators presented a petition seeking much deeper emissions cuts to the president of the conference, Jan Pronk, the Dutch environment minister. ''We're trying to build a dike of words,'' Mr. Pronk responded. Acknowledging the rifts still sharply dividing countries, he added, ''It's extremely difficult to take actions now to protect people not yet born, but that is what we are trying to do.''As several thousand delegates combed through hundreds of bracketed paragraphs in reams of treaty text, lobbyists for companies touting  everything from windmills to nuclear plants roamed the hallways, along with a similar number of campaigners from environmental groups. Despite the clashing mosaic of stances, many delegates, from both rich and poor countries, said they had a sense -- after more than a decade of meetings leading to the treaty -- that agreement could be reached, mainly because a growing number of nations were seeing the deal as an opportunity for economic growth and not simply an environmental pact.''There is no great aggressiveness from the developing countries now, not like there was in 1990,'' said a delegate from a large Asian country. He added that rich countries, in turn, are now asking ''how do we expand commercial investment opportunities and sell our technologies.''Observers who had attended previous talks agreed that the atmosphere  was different, and that Europe and the United States -- despite outward discord -- seemed poised for compromise.''The gulf doesn't seem to be as wide,'' said Senator Michael B. Enzi, Republican of Wyoming, a coal-rich state. He attended the Kyoto talks and another session in Buenos Aires and remains skeptical that the treaty will be fair to the United States. ''Compared to Kyoto,'' he said, ''they almost appear to be agreeing.''Still, some camps seemed determined to scuttle the talks. One point deemed essential by the United States is some clause that at least implies that fast-growing countries like China and India commit more concretely to initiate climate-protection programs. The Senate has said it will not approve a treaty without this. To some, this presented an opportunity. A person working with oil-producing countries described how they were successful -- for the third climate-treaty conference in a row -- at putting pressure on the organizers before the opening gavel to delete from the agenda any consideration of such a commitment from developing nations. On Sunday afternoon, as delegates girded for the increasingly intense sessions to come, many sought guidance at an ''Ecumenical Service on Climate Change'' at the Cloister Church.

Protests at climate-treaty talks here reached a high pitch today. Demonstrators climbed into the rafters of a central room, blockaded doorways, passed out Christmas stockings stuffed with coal and splattered the top American negotiator with a cream pie at a news conference tonight. The incident occurred halfway through the second week of contentious talks, due to wind up on Friday, in which delegates from 175 countries are debating ways to slow emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases, chiefly from burning fossil fuels. The meeting, seeking to create environmental and economic policies to carry out a treaty negotiated in 1997 in Kyoto, Japan, has been the focus of a growing protests. The demonstration today centered on contentions that loopholes would prevent cuts in the use of fossil fuel. The United States under secretary of state for global affairs, Frank E. Loy, had just begun defending the American stance in the talks, which has been criticized by European officials and environmental groups as too weak, when a woman jumped from her seat and threw the pie in his face. Wiping whipped cream from his lip, Mr. Loy cut short his talk and later issued a statement that said: ''On the eve of Thanksgiving, pumpkin pie would have been a more traditional choice, but what I really want is a strong agreement to fight global warming. I'm headed back to the negotiating table right now with that aim.''Environmental groups that are lobbying delegations and observing discussions disavowed the attack. ''Many are frustrated by the slow pace of negotiations and the lack of domestic action against global warming,'' said a letter issued by several dozen environmental groups. ''However, we believe there are more constructive ways to achieve our goals of preventing dangerous climate change.''The Kyoto Protocol calls for industrialized nations to reduce their combined greenhouse-gas releases by 2012 to a level at least 5 percent below emissions in 1990. Earlier today, negotiators said, some progress had been made on several important sticking points, including the roles of nuclear power and the situation in Russia, where emissions have plunged because of economic decline. That has produced a windfall of pollution credits that Russia might eventually sell to countries that are unwilling or unable to reduce emissions. Nuclear power has been a pivotal issue for the European Union and many environmental groups, which have pressed to have it excluded from a list of technologies that wealthy countries could export to poor countries to help them avoid future emissions of carbon dioxide. But Canada, China and the United States oppose such a ban. And France, despite its outward opposition, relies heavily on nuclear plants for its electricity. Tonight, it appeared that language was evolving that would give strong preference under the treaty to less controversial nonpolluting options like wind turbines, but would not explicitly banish nuclear plants. Separately, Russia proposed that any income it received from selling pollution credits would go into a ''green fund'' that would be used to pay only for energy-efficiency projects. Bill Hare, the chief representative of Greenpeace International and a longtime critic of Russia's selling its pollution credits, said the proposal was a move in the right direction. ''This looks like a positive initiative,'' he said.

The vise tightened sharply early this morning on negotiators seeking a treaty to curb global warming, yet many delegates, even as they headed into the final 24 hours of talks, said they remained far from consensus. Disputes festered among blocs of countries large and small, rich and poor, over what rules, tools and penalties should be used to stem the flow of heat-trapping greenhouse gases. Scientists say those gases, from smokestacks, tailpipes, and burning forests, are contributing to a potentially calamitous warming trend. Some bleary-eyed lobbyists from private environmental groups said they saw progress in the form of a summary of key sticking points distributed late Thursday night. It contained language that they said could protect the atmosphere and satisfy the interests of dozens of countries.''It seems to take care of the two worst ends of this environmentally,'' said Kalee Kreider, the director of climate programs for the National Environmental Trust, a private group based in Washington. And some delegates said that the penalties for failing to meet commitments under the treaty appeared to be largely ironed out. But some delegates, environmental groups, and lobbyists representing businesses affected by provisions governing fossil-fuel use said the summary still contained land mines that could destroy the effort. The proposed treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, was drafted by more than 170 countries in 1997 in Japan, and this session was intended to complete the fine print. If enacted, it would commit three dozen industrialized countries to cut their greenhouse gas emissions by 2012 to at least 5 percent below emissions in 1990. So far, no industrialized countries have ratified the pact. The European Union and the United States remain far apart on key provisions, including the amount of credit a country could get by investing in climate-protection projects abroad and how much credit toward emissions cuts could be gained by using forests to absorb carbon dioxide. And developing countries, including giants like China and oil exporters like Saudi Arabia, pressed for large payments from industrial powers to help them adapt to impending changes in climate and sea level.''They have caused the problems, they have made the whole world unsafe,'' said Sani Daura, the Nigerian minister of the environment. ''We have the highest stakes, and unfortunately they have not been able to come to terms with our concerns.''Many environmental campaigners had complained about parts of the treaty that they said would allow countries to get credit toward emissions goals simply by protecting existing forests, which sop up carbon dioxide, the dominant greenhouse gas. They had also denounced treaty language that would allow rich countries to buy emissions credits from Russia, which gained the credits simply because its economy -- and emissions -- had shrunk after the fall of Communism. Both options would be constrained under the fresh summary of the text, which was issued late Thursday  night by Jan Pronk, the president of the meeting, called the Sixth Conference of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, better known here as Cop 6. Through the first nine days of the two-week meeting, Mr. Pronk, the gruff, plain-spoken Dutch environment minister, assumed the role of referee, public advocate, and cattle prod, pressing legions of delegates to work late into the night to hash out details. After hearing from the main negotiating blocs, he distilled their essential positions into 13 slim pages, prompting hundreds of delegates, lobbyists, and observers to sprawl on the blue carpet, sifting the text for problems or progress. The summary infuriated some delegates from wealthier countries, who saw a heavy-handed effort to impede plans for an unfettered trading system that would allow one country to get credit toward emissions goals for investing in cleaner power plants or other new technologies abroad. But Mr. Pronk, at a news conference Thursday night, said the summary was a pragmatic effort to cut through competing interests. One sign that a compromise might be achievable was the observation by many participants that no one seemed particularly satisfied.''We need a decision, a decision on all key issues,'' said Mr. Pronk, who turned the screws at a news conference Thursday night by noting that the meeting hall had to be vacated for a convention by Saturday afternoon. The environmental and financial stakes are enormous, with the treaty constituting a pioneering effort to create a binding agreement under which industrialized countries would not only cut emissions, but invest billions of dollars in projects in poorer countries to prevent new emissions as their economies grow.

Negotiators met behind guarded doors late tonight, trying to reach a consensus on a global warming treaty before their meeting breaks up on Saturday.''For the environment, it doesn't get any bigger than this,'' said Jennifer Morgan, the climate change specialist for the World Wildlife Fund, as she caught delegates on the way into the negotiating room for a last bit of arm twisting. On Thursday, Jan Pronk, the overseer of the two-week meeting and the Dutch environment minister, had lowered expectations a notch, saying there would doubtless be issues that would be delayed and text that would remain unwritten. The next meetings are already scheduled, for May in Germany and for October in Morocco. But he and many participants said there was a decent chance that a general declaration of success was within reach by Saturday morning. The proposed treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, was drafted by more than 170 countries in 1997 and the session here was intended to flesh out the fine print. If enacted, the treaty would commit three dozen industrial countries to cut their greenhouse-gas emissions by 2012 at least 5 percent below the levels in 1990. So far, no industrial countries have ratified the pact. An accord, according to many delegates and scientists gathered here, could be a first tentative step away from an age built on combustion of fossil fuels, which has flooded the atmosphere with heat-trapping greenhouse gases, and toward economies that are more in balance with global ecology. Any success at all would inevitably be a result of big compromises on dozens of fronts, given the competing and contradictory situations of many countries taking part in the discussions. Cloistered in the Van Gogh Hall at the Netherlands Congress Center were representatives of tiny lowlying countries vulnerable to the rising seas expected in a warmer world; of some nations where crops might flourish in a warmer world and others whose crops could wilt; of countries cloaked in forests that can absorb carbon dioxide and help them cut emissions; and of nations whose fortunes derive from coal or oil, fuels that would lose favor and cost more should the treaty take force. As a result of this diversity, private environmental groups saw two possible outcomes. One would be a landmark success, in the form of effective, enforceable rules for cutting emissions of warming greenhouse gases. The other would be a wrenching failure, should the treaty lack clear language calling for strategies that cut emissions without creating other ecological trouble. Today, countries and alliances that had been giving daily news conferences canceled all such sessions, with the action moving into cubicles and offices. No one seemed satisfied with the latest treaty summary. Frank E. Loy, the chief American negotiator, communicated only with a printed statement, in which he said he was ''deeply disappointed'' with the document, but added that ''the situation is fluid'' and that negotiations would press ahead. And within the environmental movement, there were passionate divisions. Some people said the treaty, as proposed, failed to give credit for preserving tropical forests as a ''sink'' for carbon dioxide. Others objected to that idea, saying any credit for forest projects would take away the incentive for cutting the emissions causing the problem. Ms. Morgan said success would lie in the strength of the consensus and its power to motivate action now to start curtailing the human impact on the atmosphere. ''What we're looking for is a signal to businesses and countries that they need to start changing,'' Ms. Morgan said. In the end, the prospect of a climate treaty was creating unlikely alliances, with some businesses that had long been seen as enemies of the environment aligning themselves with conservation groups. Among those at the sessions calling for clear rules and strong penalties was Dale E. Heydlauff, senior vice president for environmental affairs of American Electric Power, a $12 billion-a-year energy company that has for decades wrestled with environmentalists over clean-air laws.''Environmental groups and industry both need strong, effective compliance mechanisms because otherwise this treaty is a fraud,'' he said. Tooker Gomberg, an environmental campaigner from Ontario, blasted a shrill note on a pocket trumpet in the press room, resulting in a stampede of television crews and reporters. He took out his passport and a cigarette lighter. ''Tonight I am ashamed to be Canadian,'' Mr. Gomberg said. ''My country is the worst country here at The Hague.''With a flick of his thumb, the passport blossomed into flames. ''Some people think this conference is an exercise in politics, diplomacy and compromise,'' he said. ''The only thing being compromised here is the integrity of the biosphere.''Eventually the halls grew quiet as aides and advisers retreated to hotels. They were useless until dawn, because their bosses were locked away with Mr. Pronk. One young man played a harmonica in a corner.

If it had been a normal November, Daniel Jones would have stayed at Hunter College through the Thanksgiving break instead of heading home to Kalamazoo, Mich. ''There's a lot of stuff I want to do in New York City,'' said Mr. Jones, a 19-year-old sophomore who had never been to the city before last year. But this was no normal November. The fate of the planet was at stake, and Mr. Jones had a chance to jump in and try to save it. Months earlier, he had seen a bulletin from an environmental group inviting more than 200 college students to come to this Dutch city to help influence negotiators who were going to tussle for two weeks over the details of a proposed treaty to fight global warming. And now he was here, with an emergency cell phone number scribbled on his forearm in case he was arrested, with a pad full of notes on where Senator Larry Craig's aide was headed, when the reception put on by nuclear power lobbyists was scheduled, what restaurant the delegates from the United States frequented for breakfast. He was on the inside.''It's a beautiful thing,'' Mr. Jones said, cracking a shy, sly smile. ''It's just so great -- like college pranks, but with a difference.''Over the course of a week here, he and more than 220 students from dozens of states had the ultimate class in environmental education, some of it uplifting and some of it a sobering reality check. Their goal was to serve as a goad, a conscience, a jab in the ribs of the lobbyists and delegates from 170 countries, conveying the message that all the minutiae they were debating -- articles 3.14 and 4.8, the emissions targets, loopholes and disputed phrases marked by brackets -- really mattered to somebody. The treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, was conceived in Japan in 1997 after a decade of debate on how to curb the flow of heat-trapping greenhouse gases from cars and power plants and burning forests. A century-long buildup of these gases, mainly carbon dioxide from fossil fuels, was thought to be raising the planet's thermostat. If enacted, the treaty would require dozens of industrialized countries to cut emissions of warming gases by 2012 to at least 5 percent below where they stood in 1990. Until the meeting here, the Kyoto treaty was essentially a new, high-stakes sport, but with no rule book, no field boundaries, no penalties. Greenpeace USA, concerned that this was going to be another in a long line of inconsequential conclaves full of huddling dark-suited diplomats, decided to inject a big dose of adrenaline. And it wouldn't hurt to foster a new generation of activists, said John Passacantando, who became the group's executive director this fall.''The environmental movement these days is mainly a bunch of 30-somethings or 40-somethings,'' he explained as he assembled the students this week for a news conference and photo session with journalists from Bangladesh, Japan, Australia and a dozen other countries. ''We need a back bench.''Mr. Jones was one of about 1,000 students who sent in applications, replete with essay questions, for the 225 openings. He lacked money to cover the $400 airfare, and sent a letter to Hunter's dean of student affairs, Sylvia Fishman. ''Her only question was how much did I need?'' he said. ''She's amazing.''The students' days began at 8:30 a. m., as they roused groggily at the youth hostel near the city's central rail station. One morning early last week, dozens of dreadlocked, pierced, tie-dyed young people -- and a few in jackets and ties, including Mr. Jones -- gathered for a breakfast of nut-laced whole grain bread, granola and strong coffee and a dose of strategizing. Chris Ball, a Greenpeace official from Washington with the perky air of a camp counselor, strode to a podium and went over some of the highlights of the days ahead, which would include all manner of theatrics and gentle monkey wrenching. He then asked for ''quick downloads'' from participants about their experiences so far. A student from Northern California described how he and several others had presented a ''head in the sand'' award outside a news conference by Senator Craig, Republican of Idaho, and Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, who had just finished describing why they opposed the treaty. The award was five Barbie dolls buried upside down in a box of sand. Across the breakfast room, another student stood and described how he and more than 20 others had sat in on a presentation by a European organization called Young Generation in Nuclear, which was at the climate conference to promote nuclear power as an alternative energy source that produces no greenhouse gas emissions. The young Greenpeace campaigners did not share that view. ''We challenged them with question after question,'' the student said. ''It was kind of depressing that someone our age could be so backward.''A Greenpeace official told them that a delegation of eight representatives from Congress had arrived. ''Six out of eight got a zero'' on the League of Conservation Voters' report card ranking votes on environmental bills, the official said.''Hissssssssssssss,'' came the communal response. The students were divided into more than a dozen groups, each focused on a different task: attracting news media attention with catchy demonstrations, dogging the tracks of lobbyists for oil companies and the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, talking with American negotiators, who were seen as seeking loopholes, or delegates from countries that had strong environmental policies. Mr. Jones was in group 13. His task was ''research and dissemination,'' in other words, intelligence gathering and communicating the latest tactics to all the other groups. Every hour or so, in a basement room tucked away from the bustling action in the rest of the sprawling convention center, he and others convened to plot moves. They donned Santa Claus hats and handed out stockings full of coal -- the dirtiest of the fossil fuels -- taken by a Greenpeace team a week earlier from a freighter in the nearby harbor of Rotterdam. While doing so, they sang modified Christmas carols, including a greenhouse version of ''Jingle Bells'': ''Hot as hell, oceans swell, warmer every day, oh, what fun it is to fry in a world with climate change.''One night, Mr. Jones and Janet Sawin, a graduate student at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy of Tufts University, jumped on a tram to head to the elegant Des Indies Hotel, where the International Nuclear Forum was the host of a reception for Republican congressmen. Mr. Jones, playing the role of decoy, strode straight into the crowd of tailored business suits wearing his red suspenders and a half-dozen brightly colored pins with strident environmental messages. Displaying his sly smile, Mr. Jones was swiftly escorted away, but this created an opening for Ms. Sawin, who was wearing an elegant maroon dress and long scarf -- and who quickly cornered Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. Earlier in the day, Mr. Sensenbrenner, Republican of Wisconsin and chairman of the House Science Committee, had blasted the treaty as a waste of time that would never be supported by Congress. Screwing up her courage, Ms. Sawin began peppering him with questions and criticisms of nuclear power and of Republican opposition to the treaty. At first, Mr. Sensenbrenner engaged in the debate, but he slowly realized this was a no-win situation and soon made for the exit. Ms. Sawin smiled. By late Wednesday night, with the negotiators making little progress, 80 of the students were starting to feel discouraged and decided to begin a fast that would take the place of the Thanksgiving feast they might otherwise be enjoying back home with friends and families. On Thanksgiving, they sat in the restaurants around the convention center staring at empty white plates, with armbands that read, ''Fasting: Ask Me Why.''Three of them sat at a table with two White House officials who picked self-consciously at their lunches but gamely conversed with the students. Amanda Long, a Wesleyan University student from Wappingers Falls, N.Y., said, ''The U.S. should really take the lead on these things.''John Gibson, a member of the American delegation, said that the negotiators were doing the best they could, but that they had to find some compromise that would protect the environment while satisfying the Senate, which must approve a treaty by a two-thirds majority.''It wouldn't do the environment much good to sign an agreement that will never be ratified,'' he said. Late Thanksgiving night, the students put on a performance of ''The Lorax,'' the environmental parable by Dr. Seuss. At the same time, an energy industry group held a reception in the basement, serving sliced turkey and cranberry sauce while a tape of Monday night's National Football League game between the Redskins and the Rams played on a projection television. Then it was time for one of the final crunch sessions, with the conference president calling a late-night  session to order. Around 1 a. m. today, as bleary delegates filed into the meeting, Mr. Jones, Ms. Sawin and a half-dozen other students joined a gantlet of campaigners and lobbyists handing out fliers pinpointing problems with the latest negotiating positions. The talks had developed a momentum that largely shrugged off their efforts. Most of the leaflets would end up on the floor.''The big issue here should be the environment,'' Ms. Sawin said, ''but it's at the bottom of the list.''Their 24-hour fast could have ended an hour earlier, but none of the students seemed to be thinking about food.

High-stakes negotiations aimed at finishing a treaty to curb global warming collapsed today after a tense all-night bargaining session foundered on last-minute disputes between European and American negotiators. The breakdown, after two weeks of intensive talks here, stunned many participants, environmental groups and observers, even though they had recognized from the start the enormous task of finding common ground on ways to cut the greenhouse gases emitted by every smokestack and tailpipe from Boston to Brisbane.''I'm gutted,'' John Prescott, Britain's deputy prime minister, said as he left the hall this morning after failing to negotiate a compromise primarily between the United States -- by far the world's largest producer of greenhouse gases -- and the European Union. But Jan Pronk, the conference president and Dutch environment minister, did not concede defeat, and instead proposed that the meeting be suspended, with another session perhaps as soon as May. The top American negotiator, Frank E. Loy, visibly tired and rubbing his forehead and eyes, agreed that the effort should continue, even when he and the Clinton administration would be handing over the task to a new administration.''We will not give up,'' Mr. Loy said. ''The stakes are too high, the science too decisive, and our planet and our children too precious.''From the outset the talks were riven by conflicting agendas as they aimed to fill in the fine print of a 1997 treaty, called the Kyoto Protocol, drafted by more than 170 countries. Poor countries sought billions of dollars to help them adapt to climate change, while rich nations aimed to blunt the economic impact of the treaty by finding the least costly ways to cut their emissions of warming gases. But today the failure came down to persistent disagreement between industrial powers on opposite sides of the Atlantic over the role of trees and properly managed farmland in acting as ''sinks'' to absorb carbon dioxide, the dominant greenhouse gas. The lack of understanding on that issue was a key to the breakdown of the talks, participants on both sides said. European negotiators ultimately rejected a compromise proposal -- which early this morning seemed to have sealed a deal -- as too harmful to the environment and too favorable to the United States. If enacted, the treaty the negotiators had hoped to complete would commit three dozen industrialized countries to cut their greenhouse gas emissions by 2012 to at least 5 percent below emissions in 1990. So far, however, no industrialized country has ratified the pact, and as negotiations have dragged on in the intervening years, the emissions of most of the world's leading producers of greenhouse gases have only continued to rise, a trend that helped add new urgency to the current round of talks. When the treaty was originally drafted in Japan three years ago, the United States, Canada and other large countries said they would seek credit toward their emissions targets for forested areas, but those talks never settled on an amount. Negotiators at the current conference had hoped to arrive at one. But ultimately no agreement could be reached. Around 3 a. m., Mr. Prescott, from Britain, and representatives of two other European nations met with the United States team over a compromise proposal. Members of both delegations said agreement was reached in that room.''We physically shooks hands,'' Mr. Loy said. ''I asked, 'Are we now in full agreement, is this a deal?' I was pointing to a piece of paper. They said, 'Yes.' ''But when that set of proposals was brought back to the rest of the European delegation, they rejected it.''We had a hard and fast political deal,'' said a member of the British delegation. But that deal could not hold up to the subsequent analysis before dawn by other European countries.''I think it is fair to say that was a pretty important opportunity that was not cashed in on,'' Mr. Loy said. Moments after word escaped that the agreement had broken down, representatives of competing private environmental groups sprinted around the halls, decrying the failure and saying simply, ''It's over.'' They then scrambled to hand out hastily drafted press releases and to hold briefings for the media shouting to be heard over the din and confusion. Many environmental groups argued that the United States had underestimated the strength of the European Green movement and its determination to reduce the use of fossil fuels drastically. A British official said that many European countries realized the significance of the idea of carbon ''sinks'' only during the current meeting -- and that it was far too late. Jennifer Morgan, climate campaign director for the World Wildlife Fund, which joined a mostly European cluster of environmental groups, blamed the United States.''The United States pushed too hard and too far,'' she said. ''They didn't leave the time or trust to get a deal in the end.''Part of the problem was a cultural rift, negotiators on both sides said. The European Union, where Green Party politics is a driving force, never found a way to compromise with the United States, where the environmental movement increasingly works with industries to bring change, instead of fighting for strict top-down regulations.''It's extremely difficult to negotiate between groups where political cultures are so different,'' Dominique Voynet, the French environment minister and a Green Party member, told the full sessions. Earlier in the week, Jurgen Trittin, the German environment minister, explained that the opposition to forest credits in his country was deeply rooted, and that there was a clear sense at the conference that the United States and its partners were trying to get something for nothing.''We have strong interest groups in German society,'' he said. ''What shall I tell them if the United States makes a fire road in a forest and flies airplanes over it and says that is an emissions project? They'd say you're ridiculous.''But some environmental groups that tend to work more closely with industry defended the American position, which focused on building a political consensus back in the United States by making sure that the agreement satisfied powerful industry and farming lobbies.''In the long-term fight against global warming, we need every tool at our disposal,'' said Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, a Washington group. Ms. Claussen was formerly part of a Clinton administration team that negotiated agreements leading up to the Kyoto Protocol.''If we take carbon sequestration and market mechanisms out of the equation, or bog them down with such overly restrictive rules that nobody uses them,'' she said, ''then we are limiting our ability to meet our environmental objectives.''Sani Daura, Nigeria's environmental minister and a spokesman for a bloc of developing nations called the Group of 77 and China -- whose exemption from emissions targets had long been seen as the most likely source of an impasse -- said the conference had failed largely because of competing economic interests in wealthy countries.''I hope all the parties have learned their lessons,'' he said. ''The breakdown came from selfishness and lack of political will, in particular from the North.''Staff members for two American senators, one Democrat and one Republican, said all was not lost, however, despite the substantial setback. The Senate had strong reservations about the Kyoto Protocol even before it was negotiated in 1997. And now there was the prospect of a new push in Washington to curb greenhouse gases, they said.''Regardless of the outcome here, the stage is set in Congress next year to consider addressing this issue in a way that makes economic and environmental sense in a coordinated fashion,'' one staff member said.

Through a decade of talks aimed at generating a treaty to curb global  warming, the United States has been portrayed as eco-enemy number one, the source of a fourth of the world's emissions of greenhouse gases, with each American responsible for 20 times as much of the problem as each resident of developing countries. The role of American forests in absorbing carbon dioxide and the country's innovative businesses as potential marketers of clean technology overseas were central topics at a two-week negotiating session in The Hague. The meeting was intended to put the finishing touches on the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty drafted in Japan three years ago. Much fine print was written, but many questions remained. The only thing that was clear was the need for yet another meeting, next fall in Marrakesh. As The Hague meeting was drawing to a close last week, the travel agency for that session was already busy signing up delegates. Andrew C. Revkin

Through a decade of scientific and political debate over global warming, private environmental groups were a driving force for a treaty committing industrial countries to fight the problem. The opponent always was industry, particularly oil and coal companies threatened by anything that might bring about an early end to the carbon age. So there was no shortage of consternation  on Saturday morning, when a rift between branches of the environmental movement appeared to have contributed to the failure of pivotal negotiations aimed at completing a pioneering climate treaty. The environmental groups that joined representatives of 175 countries in two weeks of rancorous negotiations at The Hague were sharply split. Some favored a pragmatic, if imperfect, approach -- if it got the world started toward healing the atmosphere. Others were unyielding, equating compromise with corruption. When these hard-liners ended up working in parallel with business interests who fought the treaty to avoid limits on industrial emissions, the result was deadlock.''When something like this is killed, it is killed by an alliance of those who want too much with those who don't want anything,'' said Dr. Michael Grubb, a professor of climate change and energy policy at Imperial College in London. Dr. Grubb and other scientists deeply involved in the battle over climate policy lamented the failure to find a middle ground, saying that extreme views on both sides of the issue unwittingly conspired. Yesterday, telephone lines buzzed as leaders of environmental groups around the world debated how to heal frayed relations and rebuild momentum toward global action to stem climate change. The session at The Hague was intended to write the detailed rules for carrying out the Kyoto Protocol, the treaty forged in 1997 in Japan that, by 2012, would require three dozen industrialized countries to have cut their combined emissions of greenhouse gases to 5 percent below 1990 levels. Through several meetings since then, writing the fine print had been fraught with challenges, mainly because modern life is powered by the burning of fossil fuels, the chief source of greenhouse gas emissions. At Kyoto, a central issue was whether developing countries would be required to chip in on emissions cuts. But here, that issue quickly slid to the back burner in favor of the sharp dispute between the United States and the European Union, where the Green Party holds substantial sway. For example, one highly contentious debate centered on how much credit toward emissions targets countries should get for using forests or farmland to absorb carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas. The United States initially sought to get halfway to its emissions-cutting target by using its vast forests as a carbon dioxide ''sink.'' The European Union objected, saying it was a back-door way for the world's biggest emitter of greenhouse gases to reduce its target. Early Saturday morning, the United States and three negotiators representing Europe agreed on a pared-back proposal from the Americans. But when the rest of the European Union examined the deal, which included complicated calculations of forest acres and carbon tons, it was summarily rejected. Moments later, environmental groups associated with the European position began organizing a news conference.''We're better off with no deal than a bad deal,'' said Bill Hare, the top climate campaigner for Greenpeace International. The groups denounced the United States and other countries that sought forest credits, including Japan, Canada and Australia, as trying to weaken emission targets. But the United States was the focus of the most vitriol. ''The U.S. remained immovable in its desire to placate business and industry back home,'' said a Greenpeace leaflet. Elsewhere in the hall, representatives of more centrist environmental groups, mainly American, scrambled to counterattack.''Instead of working to protect the planet, the Europeans stumbled badly when presented with what was a crucial opportunity,'' said Fred Krupp, the executive director of Environmental Defense, a private American group that has focused on building environmental programs that have the support of industries. Days earlier, Dr. Stephen H. Schneider, a Stanford climatologist who has been active in the climate change debate for 20 years, had noted the intensifying clash between environmentalists' agendas and predicted the efforts would backfire. The Kyoto protocol may be only a beginning, Dr. Schneider said in exasperation. ''But it is an important first step. You've got to get started.''Yesterday, Dr. Michael Oppenheimer, a climate expert who is the senior scientist at Environmental Defense, said that in disagreeing among themselves environmentalists might have squandered a valuable opportunity to make progress on climate change. If the White House is won by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who opposes the Kyoto treaty as unfair to the United States, it will only get harder to find consensus between Europe and the United States, Dr. Oppenheimer said. He said it was important for European and American negotiators to talk frequently between now and the next negotiating session, which is scheduled in May in Bonn. NEWS ANALYSIS

The 170 countries that gathered in The Hague to address the threat of global warming have fallen short of their main objective, which was to translate the 1997 Kyoto Accord into a detailed, enforceable treaty. The British are blaming the French, the French are blaming the Germans, and nearly everyone is blaming the United States. But the inconclusive result and the post-conference recriminations should not obscure the fact that significant progress was made on important issues. Nor should it diminish the resolve of these nations to move forward when they reconvene next May. The United States, by far the biggest producer of the greenhouse gases that are believed to be a big part of the warming problem, has a special obligation to see that the diplomacy continues. Whoever is chosen as the next American president needs to put the matter on his agenda right away and assemble a team to continue the negotiations. This should present no problem for Al Gore, an architect of the Kyoto agreement. For George W. Bush, who has acknowledged that global warming is a problem but has criticized Kyoto as placing too heavy a burden on the United States, it will mean a fast trip up the learning curve on a complicated issue. The Kyoto agreement committed the industrialized countries to cut their greenhouse gas emissions below 1990 levels by 5.2 percent. The dominant greenhouse gas is carbon dioxide, caused by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil in power plants and vehicles. In principle, the agreement allowed nations to meet their targets in several ways. They could make ''real'' reductions in fossil fuel use, for example by investing heavily in cleaner fuels and cleaner plants. They could earn credits by investing in clean-air projects in other countries, or by buying those credits on the open market from other countries that had already met their targets. They could also claim credit for so-called carbon ''sinks'' -- forests that remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere through photosynthesis. The talks in The Hague collapsed mainly because the industrialized countries could not agree on how much credit should be given for trees. The United States' opening proposal was clearly unacceptable. It wanted to meet half its goal by counting its existing forests, a proposal the Europeans quite properly suspected as a scheme to get something for nothing. On the other hand, the Europeans showed scant appreciation for political realities in the United States, including Congress's deep suspicion of any treaty that would threaten economic growth by imposing crippling burdens on energy use. By the end of the conference, the United States had reduced the credits it wanted for forests and other sinks by nearly three-fourths -- a reasonable compromise, but not to some Europeans. Nevertheless, there was heartening progress on other issues, including vital cost-effective mechanisms that will allow nations to trade emissions credits on the open market and claim credit for investing in clean-fuel projects abroad. There was also agreement on meaningful penalties for non-compliance. That progress -- and the increasingly persuasive science about the perils of global warming -- are reasons enough to try again in May.

To the Editor:Re ''Treaty Talks Fail to Find Consensus in Global Warming'' (front page, Nov. 26):The United States could go a long way toward meeting emission standards set down by the Kyoto Protocol, agreed to in 1997, if those 90 percent of Americans voicing concern for the planet would follow two basic prescriptions for environmental responsibility:One, increase home energy efficiency by using simple household innovations like compact fluorescent light bulbs, upgraded insulation and energy-saving shower heads. (Homeowners could see a multi-ton reduction in the carbon dioxide emissions they cause each year and in the process save hundreds of dollars in yearly energy costs.)Two, earmark the savings for earth-friendly goods and services available in stores and online, thereby encouraging a shift to a more sustainable marketplace. DAVID WEAST  Madison, Wis., Nov. 27, 2000

To the Editor:The collapse of climate change negotiations in The Hague (front page, Nov. 26) provides us with an opportunity to readdress the issue of global warming. The Kyoto Protocol, not yet ratified, requires developed countries to constrain energy use, a major ingredient to economic growth and well-being. Moreover, in presuming an atmosphere of crisis, the protocol frustrates consideration of a rational, long-term approach, one comprising continuing scientific assessment, development of cost-effective options and public debate and consensus building. A useful start would be to abandon the protocol. We would do both the global economy and the environment a vital service by taking a pragmatic view in determining what needs to be done and how we intend to do it. CLEMENT B. MALIN  Weston, Conn., Nov. 27, 2000The writer led the International Chamber of Commerce delegation to the United Nations climate change negotiations, 1994-98.

To the Editor:The collapse of the United Nations conference on climate change (front page, Nov. 26) undermines the United States' leadership position in the rest of the world. The United States wants to attribute the failure of the conference to the European Union's unwillingness to be ''reasonable'' and compromise in order to reach agreement. But the United States' position reduced an already severely diluted Kyoto agreement to the point where no meaningful reduction in greenhouse gases would have been accomplished at all. This is despite the fact that the United States is by far the world's biggest polluter and has done nothing to address the problem. This cynical disregard of a global danger and the cavalier dismissal of the rest of the world's effort to try to come to grips with this problem is a national disgrace. PAUL W. ROSENBERGER  Manhattan Beach, Calif., Nov. 28, 2000

With the odds increasing every day that George W. Bush will be declared the 43rd president, a couple of things are becoming clear: Bush voters are the likely winners. Gore voters are the likely losers. And all those people who voted for Ralph Nader and the Green Party are the likely really big losers. Why? Just do the math. Assuming a very narrow victory for Mr. Bush, and a 50-50 split in the U.S. Senate, it's highly doubtful that on the big policy issues -- tax cuts, Social Security, education, foreign policy -- a Bush administration will be able to do much more, or much less, than a Gore administration. Where Mr. Bush will have the biggest impact is not through the macro-politics, but through the micro-politics -- on all those issues that reside just below the radar, on all those issues where the hundreds of assistant secretaries, agency heads and department chiefs, whom the Bush team will appoint throughout the government, will have the discretion, guidance and desire to impose a conservative ethos. And what are those issues? Well, let's see -- things like how environmental regulations are interpreted, where oil wells can be dug in Alaska, what sorts of lands the Interior Department sets aside for conservation, how worker health and safety rules are enforced or expanded, how labor laws are interpreted, how gun control is dealt with, how aggressively fuel efficiency standards are pursued, how assiduously global population control programs are supported and to what extent the U.S. works to curb the ''greenhouse'' gases that are causing global warming. There is actually another name for all these environmental, social and labor issues: ''The Nader Agenda.'' These are all the issues that Ralph Nader and his supporters professed to care most about. Well, guess what? All their issues are going to get the short end of the stick from a Bush-staffed bureaucracy, which will be heavily influenced by the oil and gas industry, the National Rifle Association and the anti-abortion lobby. Just think about one area -- global warming. Instead of having as president Al Gore, someone who would have made it a priority to rescue the failed Kyoto climate change treaty,  we will probably have a president and vice president both of whom came from the energy business and don't even believe global warming is for real. Mr. Bush's chief of staff will be Andrew Card, who spent the last seven years as chief lobbyist for the auto industry, fighting tighter fuel economy, air pollution and global warming regulations. So Mr. Nader helped deliver a president from the oil industry, a vice president from the drilling industry and a chief of staff from the auto industry. Have a nice day. Indeed, when we wake up 20 years from now and find that the Atlantic Ocean is just outside Washington, D.C., because the polar icecaps are melting, we may look back at this pivotal election. We may wonder whether it wasn't the last moment when a U.S. policy to deal with global warming might have made a difference, and we may ask why the party most concerned about that, the Greens, helped to elect Mr. Bush by casting 97,000 Nader votes in Florida. Nader's voters forgot what Nader's Raiders always remembered: Government is not just about the big bills and legislation. It's also about lots of little things, decided by lots of little bureaucrats whom each party brings to Washington when it takes over. Throughout the campaign, the egomaniacal Mr. Nader -- who makes Ross Perot look selfless by comparison -- justified taking away votes from Mr. Gore by arguing that there really wasn't much difference between him and Mr. Bush. And, like a good Leninist, Mr. Nader also didn't seem to mind destroying the Democratic Party to save it. Well, maybe there didn't appear to be much difference between the two men -- but there was a huge difference between the hundreds of key people Al Gore and George Bush would appoint to staff their administrations. And those hundreds of people will make thousands of decisions that one day will add up to a very big difference. If you need any proof of that, look at Florida. Look at how many key decisions were taken by ''little people'' who resided below the radar screens -- local judges, senior state officials and local election supervisors. They are the gears of government, and in a Bush administration they are the ones who will be interpreting and regulating everything the Naderites care about. As I said, have a nice day.

Bill Clinton came into office pledging to take action against global warming. His vice president was the world's most knowledgeable politician on the subject. The two served in a time of unparalleled prosperity. But Mr. Clinton and Al Gore leave having accomplished nothing, simply because global warming was too politically painful to address head-on. The coda to their failure was last month's bumbling of the Kyoto Accord talks, when America's unwillingness to cut fuel use meaningfully drove the rest of the world away from the bargaining table. Now George W. Bush takes office. His party platform calls for more research into the issue; he has waffled on it. His choice for energy secretary, Spencer Abraham, is a Michigan senator who worked hard to protect Detroit from stricter fuel-efficiency standards. And his nominee for chief of the Environmental Protection Agency, Gov. Christie Whitman of New Jersey, muddled the science of climate change with the chemistry of the ozone hole in an interview last week. (They are separate problems; the second was addressed by the Reagan administration's ending of chlorofluorocarbon production.)We environmentalists have somehow failed to communicate that no more pressing danger faces the planet than global warming. And so perhaps it makes sense to offer just the briefest of primers, one more stab at saying what is happening in the atmosphere of our planet. In the simplest terms, the sky is filling with carbon dioxide. As we burn fossil fuels, we emit this gas; it is not pollution in the normal sense since it doesn't choke us or make us sick. But its molecular structure traps heat near the planet that would otherwise radiate out to space. The latest scientific consensus, leaked from the International Panel on Climate Change last fall, is that Earth will heat by three to six degrees Fahrenheit in this century, making it far warmer than at any point in human history. The panel's worst-case projection is a jump of 11 degrees, taking us deep into the realm of science fiction. Both projections are much higher than the 1995 numbers. Even the lower projection carries ominous implications for anyone living near sea level, for anyone in the path of storms and for great swaths of the rest of creation. We are talking about the de-creation of the sweet planet we were born onto. The only way to slow the warming is to reduce our use of fossil fuel -- especially we Americans, who use five times more per capita than the average earthling. The American negotiators who undermined the Kyoto treaty talks were big on the idea of responding to the warming by planting trees. Trees do absorb carbon dioxide, but not enough. And the latest research makes it plain that as forests heat up, too, and organic decay accelerates, these supposed ''carbon sinks'' will turn into carbon sources. A late fall article in the journal Nature estimated that by the century's end carbon pouring from forests could add two degrees to the panel's global warming totals. Yet no American politician can bear to do anything to restrict our piggish use of coal and gas and oil -- not to raise energy prices or legislate against the plague of gas-guzzling SUV's. During the campaign, Mr. Gore even demanded that the Strategic Petroleum Reserve be opened to keep fuel prices down. No wonder Americans produce 12 percent more carbon dioxide annually than they did when Mr. Clinton took office, according to Energy Department figures. Figures released in October by the department show that Americans used 1.3 percent more fossil fuel in 1999 than in 1998. So much for ''voluntary measures.''One plausible reading of the new scientific data is that we've waited too long already. Ice is melting in the Arctic and in our glaciers at a galloping pace. Coral reefs are bleaching to extinction in warmer water. We may have set in motion forces deeper than we may be able to deal with. So environmentalists have no choice but to press harder -- to make the case that this is the most morally compelling issue of our time. Because even if we swallow our fear to approach the problem optimistically, one thing is certain. We don't have another decade or another administration to waste. Bill McKibben is a fellow at Harvard's Center for the Study of Values in Public Life and author of ''Long Distance: A Year of Living Strenuously.''

Foreign policy has not played a decisive role in electing a president since 1968, the height of the Vietnam War. And since 1992, when Bill Clinton recognized that the end of the cold war made George Bush's victory in the Persian Gulf very nearly irrelevant as a political asset, foreign policy has become an electoral afterthought. In this past campaign, Al Gore and George W. Bush delivered the speeches on diplomacy that are still required in order to scale Mount Gravitas, and in their second debate they engaged in a blurry, amiable 45-minute discussion of foreign affairs. After a brief, failed attempt to get Bush to concede that he would not necessarily intervene abroad even to prevent genocide, Gore essentially gave up trying to draw sharp distinctions with his opponent, apparently reasoning that deploying his immensely superior knowledge of the world might make him seem pedantic rather than seasoned. (Bush was held to have won the debate after successfully reciting the names of four large Middle Eastern countries.) In their closing statements, Gore and Bush hurried back to the home front, focusing on education and tax policy. Perhaps we should feel grateful that foreign policy has lost its political prominence. The sense of menace that once made the world matter urgently to us has subsided with the end of the cold war. But if today's world is less dangerous, it is also more complex. Just think of the foreign engagements that virtually forced themselves on President Clinton: two military interventions, in Bosnia and in Kosovo, and two economic ones, in Mexico and in Asia. The first pair involved the new phenomenon of disintegrating states, the second the new phenomenon of economic globalization. Forces both smaller and larger than the state now play a crucial role in foreign affairs. And as the terrain has changed, so have the terms of the debate. During the cold war, there was one axis and two poles -- hard or soft on Communism. But it's no longer obvious what it means to be ''liberal'' or ''conservative'' on foreign policy. Does it mean anything at all? At the outset of that second debate, Jim Lehrer asked each candidate about his ''guiding principles'' for the exercise of America's extraordinary power in the world. George Bush said, ''The first question is what's in the best interests of the United States.'' Al Gore then pointedly said, ''I see it as a question of values.'' But Gore's subsequent attempts to appear affable blurred the very real philosophical disagreement between the two men. Bush made it plain that he would be far more reluctant than Gore to use the military to prevent mass killing abroad and to promote ''nation building''; he even said, in language that would have sounded distinctly ''left'' during the cold war, that ''one way for us to end up being viewed as the ugly American is for us to go around the world saying, 'We do it this way, so should you.' ''Gore, on the other hand, insisted that acting according to our values is profoundly in the national interest. The self-conscious use of the words ''interest'' and ''values'' points to one way in which the foreign-policy debate has realigned itself since the end of the cold war. The words correspond roughly to the realism of traditional European diplomacy and to the idealism associated, for good and for ill, with Woodrow Wilson. And although the Gore side would not have accepted the Wilsonian label, the Bush team was eager to don the mantle of realism. In fact, Condoleezza Rice, Bush's principal foreign policy adviser during the campaign and soon to be his national security adviser, expressed this distinction with great clarity last year in an article in the journal Foreign Affairs. When foreign policy is centered on values, she explained, ''the 'national interest' is replaced with 'humanitarian interests' or the interests of 'the international community.' The belief that the United States is exercising power legitimately only when it is doing so on behalf of someone or something else was deeply rooted in Wilsonian thought, and there are strong echoes of it in the Clinton administration. To be sure, there is nothing wrong with doing something that benefits all humanity, but that is, in a sense, a second-order effect.'' There is an unsettling coldbloodedness in that ''second-order effect,'' though it doesn't read as if Rice is trying to shock. She simply does not believe in humanitarianism as a goal of foreign policy.''Realism'' may sound like nothing more than an honest assessment of a dangerous world, but it is important to understand how far this stands outside the American tradition. In his recent book, ''Diplomacy,'' Henry Kissinger writes that from Woodrow Wilson to George Bush, ''American presidents have invoked their country's unselfishness as the crucial attribute of its leadership role.'' Wilsonian idealism was so deeply in the American grain that party affiliation scarcely mattered: with his imagery of a ''shining city on a hill'' versus ''an evil empire,'' and with his interventions all over the globe, Ronald Reagan was Wilson's most unabashed follower. George Bush the elder toned down the evangelism, but his foreign policy was grounded in Wilson's language of mutuality and cooperation -- above all in creating the coalition that waged the gulf war. What is striking about George W. Bush and his inner circle is not how different they sound from Bill Clinton but how different they sound from the first President Bush. The New World Order is as distant a memory as the evil empire. Helping humanity is suddenly a second-order effect. As Rice put it sardonically in an interview last fall, ''We don't need to have the 82nd Airborne escorting kids to kindergarten'' in Bosnia and Kosovo. And it isn't only the moralism, but also the mutuality, that has become passe. Most of Bush's top advisers oppose the principal international compacts that our allies have adopted in recent years: the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty; the Kyoto Protocol on global warming; the International Criminal Court. What one feels, in talking to the people who are likely to determine foreign policy in the Bush administration, is a worldly pragmatism but also a preoccupation with threat, a suspiciousness about negotiations, a willingness to go it alone. It's no coincidence that the central theme of the new administration's military policy will be national missile defense, which holds out the tantalizing promise of instant security in an inherently insecure world. This defensive posture, combined with a willingness to withdraw from the global community, leads a former high-ranking official in the Clinton State Department to describe a probable Bush foreign policy as ''a strange mix of timidity and arrogance.'' Even Kissinger, a realist himself, might wonder whether so narrowly drawn and unsentimental a policy could inspire the American people. Perhaps the most hopeful thing one can say is that administrations rarely stick to the abstract principles they lay out during the campaign. It is precisely because we no longer live in a status-quo world that George W. Bush will be subjected to a question that must irk him and certainly infuriates the people around him: ''Does he get it?'' The president-elect really does know a lot about education, and about faith-based initiatives, and no doubt about some other domestic issues as well. But pretty much everything that he knows about the world beyond our borders, with the exception of Mexico, he has picked up from bull sessions with Condoleezza Rice and the band of advisers she assembled in 1999. The advisers say that Bush proved to be a diligent student, but you have to wonder about even that. When an interviewer asked him about the Taliban during the campaign, Bush drew a blank. Only when given a hint -- repression of women in Afghanistan'' -- did Bush say, ''Oh. I thought you said some band. The Taliban in Afghanistan! Absolutely. Repressive.''Critics often describe Bush as ''incurious'' about the world, but that word hardly does justice to what feels almost like a principled provincialism. Here was someone who by age 13 was mingling in the country-club set of Houston, who then went on to Andover, Yale and Harvard Business School -- and did so in the age of cut-rate international air fares -- and yet he rarely traveled abroad. Bush was in his mid-20's when his father became ambassador to the United Nations, and still he stayed home. He must have had to resist actively his parents' blandishments. He visited China in 1975, when his father was U.S. liaison; Gambia, at President Bush's behest, in 1990; and the Middle East in 1998, when he had begun thinking about his own run for the presidency. (He also traveled to Europe several times in the 90's with the Young Presidents' Organization, a group for corporate executives.)People close to Bush dismiss his past as irrelevant; he has, they say, both the experience and the character to direct the affairs of the free world. Condoleezza Rice argues that as governor of Texas, Bush gained a familiarity with foreign affairs from his dealings with Mexico. ''He has on-the-ground experience there,'' she says, ''which I would say is much more valuable than if he had been attending seminars at the Council on Foreign Relations for the last five years.'' Rice also turns the insularity argument on its head, arguing that the president-elect ''comes at this as an American with very, very American values.'' These arguments seem reassuring mostly to Bush's own allies. Many Europeans, for example, see the president-elect as an all-American boob. Olivier Duhamel, a respected and usually restrained French commentator on foreign affairs, described Bush in Le Monde as a symbol of the ''cretinisation'' of American politics. The core issue is not whether Bush is smart enough to grasp the nuances of a complex world -- he has smart advisers for that -- but whether he cares enough. His party is led by figures, from Trent Lott to Tom DeLay, who view much of the foreign world with outright suspicion. Brent Scowcroft, Bush the elder's national security adviser, describes a ''mood change'' in Congress since his time in office toward a view that is ''much more conservative, much more hostile to multilateralism.'' Will Bush speak unambiguously to these figures, and to the public, about the virtues of active diplomacy? It doesn't seem very likely. Of course, Bush's capacities wouldn't matter terribly much if he chooses to function as a figurehead in foreign affairs. Talking to diplomats and foreign-policy scholars both here and abroad, the same refrain occurs again and again: thank God he'll have the father nearby - or Dick Cheney, or Colin Powell, or the advisers who told him what to say during the campaign. In fact, Bush will clearly be turning to his father for advice, as he always has, though one family friend says that Poppy will offer his counsel only if W. specifically asks for it. Vice President-elect Cheney is almost certain to play an important role in defense issues, especially since his former mentor, Donald Rumsfeld, has been nominated to head the Pentagon; but Cheney may be too preoccupied with Congress to play a major role in formulating foreign policy. If there is to be a regent in foreign affairs, it will thus be Colin Powell, Bush's nominee for secretary of state. It is, in fact, hard to overstate the power that comes with Powell's stratospheric, almost absurd, standing with the American public. It is as if he had done the new administration a favor by joining it. Dov Zakheim, a Defense Department official in the Reagan administration and one of Bush's foreign policy advisers during the campaign, says, ''Any doubts about the coherence or vision of a Bush foreign policy will immediately dissipate'' when Powell takes office. That's hyperbolic, but it is true that the same Europeans, and for that matter the same Democrats, who ridicule Bush speak respectfully of Powell, even when they disagree with his views. At the same time, it's not altogether obvious why that's so. Powell is a career military man -- he also served briefly as Reagan's national security adviser -- who until now has needed to understand the world as soldiers do. He may well be deeply versed in world affairs, though it would be hard to say on the strength of the 45-minute off-the-record telephone conversation that I was permitted to have with him and Rice. Powell was measured, soft-spoken, deferential and somewhat prone to lofty sentiments of the after-dinner-speaker variety, while Rice fired off a steady ack-ack of particulars. Indeed, it may be Powell's diplomatic temperament, rather than the acuity of his views, that accounts for the emollient effect he has on critics. And yet, thanks to his standing in the world -- and Bush's lack of it -- Powell will be able to operate with tremendous latitude, if he wishes. It's not easy to see how Bush could fire him or perhaps even overrule him. Powell could well turn out to be the most powerful secretary of state since Kissinger. If Powell will be the Bush administration's Mr. Outside, Condoleezza Rice, as national security adviser, will be Ms. Inside. A former official on the Security Council in the Bush administration, she met W. in 1995, and the two bonded when Rice talked baseball. Bush quickly found that he was comfortable asking her the most elementary questions. Rice is crisp, knowledgeable, self-assured and quite possibly bionic. She has spoken in the past of having no time for a wide range of otherwise normal human activities, including recreation, family, introspection, ''life crises.'' While Powell will almost certainly be the key figure in the formulation of policy, Rice seems likely to wield a whip hand inside the National Security Council. It was Rice who insisted that she and Powell would speak to me only by conference call; and after we had our conversation, she e-mailed colleagues informing them that they need not -- meaning, ought not -- talk to me, though several did so. Rice assembled Bush's team of foreign-policy advisers for the campaign, passing over moderate Republicans in favor of what Robert Gallucci, the dean of the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University, describes as ''intelligent hard-liners.'' Rice is an intelligent hard-liner herself. There's a delicious twist in the fact that her mentor at the University of Denver, where she earned her doctorate, was Josef Korbel, the father of Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright. Albright's flights of moral passion, her description of the United States as the ''indispensable nation'' and her eagerness to use the military for humanitarian purposes appear to Rice and her colleagues as the very text of reckless Wilsonianism. On many issues, a bush administration will probably not behave very differently from its predecessor, campaign rhetoric notwithstanding. True, it will not publicly lecture our less democratic allies in Asia about their human rights violations, as the Clinton administration was wont to do, and it will expect the Russians to reform their economy without so much international help; but these are differences in emphasis, not in kind. Bush's advisers insist that they will isolate Iraq and keep it from making weapons of mass destruction, but some of them concede that it is easier to criticize the current policy than to come up with a workable alternative. As for our policy toward Israel, the main difference may be who's involved in negotiations. George Bush is not going to be pulling all-nighters going over maps of the West Bank. Any peace brokering will be handled by Colin Powell. As Dov Zakheim puts it, ''One of the biggest shortcomings in the way we've handled the Middle East is that the president was his own secretary of state.''Overall, a Bush administration is likely to have the kind of foreign policy the corporate community likes -- less focus on human rights, more on free trade. Bush will be meeting with Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada as well as with various Latin American leaders at the Summit of the Americas in April. A principal topic on the agenda will be removing barriers to trade. As one of Bush's advisers says, ''Clinton and Gore understood the benefits of open markets, but they had a real political constituency problem'' -- labor and environmental groups that insisted on trade restrictions. Bush will be able to unambiguously extol free markets, as he will again with the Chinese at an Asia-Pacific regional meeting next fall. At the same time, ''free markets,'' like ''strong defense,'' is a shibboleth, not a policy. Europeans take a far more restrictive view than Americans do on, for example, the marketing of personal information, or the sale of genetically modified food; these will be among the difficult trade issues of the future. But the great difference between Bush and Clinton will most likely have to do with military and defense policy. Bush and the people around him believe ardently that only by constructing a national missile defense, or N.M.D., can the United States offer security in a world where not only Saddam Hussein but Osama bin Laden may gain access to weapons of mass destruction. Security in such a world may in fact be a fantasy; the Pentagon has suffered one embarrassing setback after another as it has tried to create a functioning missile-defense system. But Bush's advisers argue that the Clinton administration made only a halfhearted commitment to developing N.M.D. However, the political problems with missile defense may prove even more intractable than the technical ones. N.M.D. would require a major rewriting of the 1972 ABM treaty with the Russians. Vladimir Putin, the president of Russia, has gone around the world organizing opposition to the N.M.D. plan and has enjoyed a great deal of success. I called half a dozen foreign-policy figures in Europe and Canada without finding a single one who thought it would enhance security. Bush's advisers say they believe that Clinton made no attempt to mollify the Russians or persuade the Europeans on N.M.D. During the campaign, Bush said he would consider making major unilateral cuts to our stock of offensive missiles, in the hope of making it clear to the Russians that N.M.D. is not designed to win a nuclear chess game with them but is rather in our mutual interest. He also stated that the missile-defense umbrella would cover our allies as well as ourselves. However, few Europeans worry about rogue missiles nearly as much as about the threat of an angry Russia, and the Russians -- as well as the Chinese -- may well feel that they can get far more mileage out of depicting the United States as a global aggressor than out of acquiescing to Bush's terms. So what happens if the Russians refuse to rewrite the ABM treaty? The Bush team will unilaterally abrogate it. Our allies would accept the inevitable, with greater or lesser grace. But public opinion throughout the West would almost certainly be inflamed. And we would have confirmed some of the darkest fears of our allies. Dominique Moisi, a French foreign-policy commentator, says: ''There is a feeling that there will be some kind of uncoupling between the American destiny and the European destiny. For a Republican administration, the United States is the only global actor on the world screen; they accept Europe, but as a regional actor.'' Moisi says that he expects ''more arrogance and more unilateralism.''And that arrogance and unilateralism are what, at bottom, our allies fear most. The doctrine of national interests offers a permanent rationale for going your own way -- no matter what the world says. Condoleezza Rice has written that it is not ''isolationist to suggest that the United States has a special role in the world and should not adhere to every international convention and agreement that someone thinks to propose.'' It may not be, but ordinary citizens in much of Europe and Canada, as well as many diplomats and statesmen, are quite committed to peacekeeping and nation-building and war-crimes tribunals and indeed the entire moral panoply that Rice and others speak of dismissively. The scorn for the emerging framework of international norms looks especially disturbing when combined with a pugnacious commitment to missile defense. ''On the one hand,'' says Janice Stein, director of the Munk Center for International Studies at the University of Toronto, ''there's a disengagement from most of the issues and most of the international frameworks; on the other hand, a willingness to say to the Russians: 'You don't like it? That's too bad.' That's not a comforting view for close neighbors and friends.''This growing anxiety burst into view in October, when Stephen Hadley, a member of the Bush team, had to reassure Lord Robertson, the secretary general of NATO, after Condoleezza Rice said that Bush favored ''a new division of labor'' among the allies that might have led the United States to withdraw its troops from the Balkans. Hadley delivered the message that a Bush administration would not act unilaterally; in fact, Bush came to Clinton's aid when he publicly opposed the Byrd-Warner bill, which would have placed a specified date on the withdrawal of American troops. Still, Europeans fear that, as with N.M.D., the Bush administration will act unilaterally if persuasion fails. This is an issue of overwhelming importance to many Europeans, who watched with horror as Bosnian irregulars took their peacekeeping soldiers hostage when NATO engaged in ''pinprick'' bombing in 1994. There were no American forces on the ground at the time. ''The lesson we all drew from Bosnia,'' says Mats Berdal, an analyst at the International Institute of Strategic Studies in London, ''is that Europeans being on the ground and Americans not is a disastrous combination.''But the Bush team does not believe that American soldiers should be escorting children to kindergarten, in the Balkans or anywhere else. American soldiers will be preparing for global engagements like the gulf war, even if that means that the world's greatest fighting machine never fights, while lesser forces can face the perils of peacekeeping around the globe. In the new division of labor that Rice and others envision, regional forces would keep the peace in local hot spots, while the U.S. military provided intelligence, airlift, command and control, but not ground troops. The European Union has been talking about creating a 60,000-man ''rapid deployment force,'' and some Bush advisers believe that this force could replace the Americans in Bosnia and Kosovo. ''If the European military force is going to have any role,'' one aide says, ''why wouldn't this be one?'' It's both a plausible strategy and a fair question; but at least at the moment, the rapid deployment force is wholly hypothetical. So if the Bush administration withdraws, what becomes of the Balkans? George W. Bush has said that he favored the bombing in Bosnia in 1995 and Kosovo in 1999; nevertheless, just as he opposes the use of the American military for peacekeeping and nation-building, so he thinks that, with extremely rare exceptions, it should not be engaged in humanitarian interventions. In an interview with Sam Donaldson last January, Bush said that if another Rwanda occurred on his watch, he would not send American troops, though he would speak with the United Nations and ''encourage them to move.'' This was not far from saying, ''It's none of our business.'' Clinton, of course, kept out of Rwanda, and in fact blocked Security Council action, though he later apologized for his inaction. Bush, presumably, would not have apologized, because Rwanda, and Africa generally, do not make the list of vital interests. There is a spectrum of opinion on humanitarian intervention that stretches from ''almost always'' to ''virtually never.'' A number of Republicans have tried to come up with theoretical formulations for positions somewhere in the center. Richard Haass, a former colleague of Rice's on the National Security Council, has argued in a book called ''The Reluctant Sheriff'' that intervention may be appropriate in order to protect lives or to promote nation-building in cases when vital interests do not dictate otherwise. Arnold Kanter, who was an undersecretary of state in the Bush administration, has made a similar argument. ''We as Americans,'' Kanter writes, ''must face ourselves, live with the consequences of our action or inaction.''Most of Bush's advisers, however, can live with themselves quite well without Haass's or Kanter's formulations. Dov Zakheim, for example, has written that the scale of atrocities in places like the Balkans is often exaggerated, and that in any case violating another nation's sovereignty threatens ''to unravel the entire fabric of international relations.'' Zakheim concludes that we should intervene ''only when our own interests are clearly at stake, or when genocide is so manifest that refusal to act would destroy our moral leadership of the free world.'' In other words, if we can preserve our moral leadership without acting in the face of genocide, that's fine. The Zakheim Doctrine brings moral considerations about as close to zero as humanly possible. Zakheim, Rice and others say that we should rely on regional actors, as we did in East Timor and Sierra Leone. There is nothing wrong with this, in theory, but countries with highly professional armies, like Australia, do not generally live next door to tormented places like East Timor. And much less professional armies cannot be counted on to intervene effectively and to stick around as long as needed, as the example of Nigerian forces in Sierra Leone has made clear. Some moderate Republicans have suggested that the United Nations should dispatch forces in such circumstances. It is, however, virtually impossible to get a member of Bush's inner circle to utter a positive word about U.N. peacekeeping. And so if an effective regional actor doesn't happen to be available during the next mass slaughter, the Bush administration may have to decide whether or not to violate its principles. And this brings us back to Colin Powell and his famous doctrine, which stipulates that military force should be used only to support a clear political objective and with sufficient resources to ensure success. The paradox of Powell's career is that he opposed the one war that satisfied his own stringent terms, arguing that we would suffer hundreds or even thousands of deaths in Iraq, and that the American people would never accept casualties to keep the price of oil down. But since the war made him a hero, his misjudgment was forgotten. Powell then began applying the Iraq test to other interventions and found them wanting. He played a major role in preventing the Clinton administration from acting in Bosnia in 1993, while he continued to serve as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff. He was convinced that the Balkans were Vietnam redux. The Serbs, Croats and Muslims, he wrote, ''are committed to fight to the death for what they believe to be their vital interests,'' while the West ''has not been able to find its vital interests or matching commitment.'' Powell turned out, fortunately, to be wrong on this score as well; he seems to be so reluctant to commit American forces in unconventional circumstances that he underestimates their ability to prevent suffering and provide a measure of stability. He appears never to have acknowledged his mistakes nor to have changed his views. You hear a lot, in the theorizing by the Bush camp, about the supposedly harmful effects of ''low intensity'' interventions on the U.S. military; you don't hear much about the actual human beings on the other end. Timely intervention by U.N. forces could have saved countless lives in Rwanda. The Bush administration's failure to act in Bosnia in 1991 ''wasted the opportunity to save over a hundred thousand lives,'' Warren Zimmerman, then the ambassador to Yugoslavia, later wrote. The Clinton administration's dithering was equally responsible for that catastrophe, perhaps more so. Now a new Bush administration is talking about withdrawing those troops. What would that mean to the Bosnians and Kosovars themselves? ''Ordinary people look at Americans as the people who brought peace to them,'' says Senad Pecanin, editor of Dani, the largest political weekly in Bosnia. ''If the Americans leave, it would be a signal to the nationalists that they could resume their policy to divide Bosnia.'' In Kosovo, Veton Surroi, publisher of Koha Ditore, the leading political daily in the area, says that the news that a Bush administration might gradually withdraw American troops ''was a welcome message for extremists on both the Serb and the Albanian side.'' American troops constitute less than 20 percent of the total in Bosnia and Kosovo, but Bosnians and Kosovars both talk about the psychological importance of their presence; the commitment seems real as long as the global superpower is there, on the ground. Not very long ago, an American president said, ''We have a vision of a new partnership of nations . . . based on consultation, cooperation and collective action . . . whose goals are to increase democracy, increase prosperity, increase the peace and reduce arms.'' A chairman of the joint chiefs said: ''In every corner of the world our troops are at work. These warriors of freedom, these men and women who love peace, who are prepared to die for its preservation, are doing their important part to help fulfill the concepts of the United Nations Charter.'' The president was George Bush -- the other George Bush -- and the military man was Colin Powell. It seems almost incredible that, only a decade later, that faith in the moral purposes of American power could come to seem so softheaded, so ill suited to the real world. Perhaps the old language, in retrospect, was too big; but the new language is very, very small. Has the world changed so very much since then? Or is it we who have changed? James Traub is a contributing writer for the magazine.

Scientists from 150 governments began a four-day meeting here today to try to agree on what latest evidence of global warming should be used as the basis to set global environmental policies. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an organization of hundreds of scientists that the United Nations created in 1988 to assess warming, has drafted a thick report that doubles the top end of the temperature increase predicted over the next century, by 11 degrees. The meeting here is the first of several to fine-tune a summary of that report to be used by governments in negotiating a climate treaty. The report updates the organization's latest assessment of global warming, in 1995, and suggests an acceleration of the trends that have caused alarm among environmentalists. The draft finds that the warming in the 20th century was likely to have been the greatest of any century in the last 1,000 years for the Northern Hemisphere and that the 1990's was the warmest decade of the last millennium. Rising temperatures have also lengthened the ''freeze-free'' season in many mid- and high-latitude regions, the draft says, and they have cut snow cover since the 1960's by 10 percent. The rate at which the sea level rose in the last century was 10 times faster than the average rate over the last 3,000 years. The findings add urgency to treaty negotiations aimed at carrying out the reductions in greenhouse gases stipulated by the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, a treaty signed by more than 100 countries, but not ratified by any industrialized nations. The latest round of talks ended without an agreement in November in the Netherlands, and today dissension rippled through the conference hall. Greenpeace argues that scientific evidence is being ignored by industrialized nations reluctant to enact costly policies to cut emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. Chinese representatives complained that the forum ignored the views of scientists who discount evidence of global warming as part of normal climatic fluctuations or cast doubt on the effects of carbon dioxide.''The organization is supposed to report objectively, but it now tends to fix the conclusion first and then find evidence to support that conclusion,'' said Lu Xuedu, a delegate from the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology. Among Beijing's objections to the 1,000-page summary report, from which China's contribution was left out, Mr. Lu said, is the finding that the increase in greenhouse gases and associated warming stemmed primarily from human activities, a contention that bears directly on the coal-dependent power generation that drives China's economic development. China, nonetheless, is working to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions by adding power plants fueled by natural gas, water or nuclear energy, said Gao Feng, deputy director general of the Treaty and Law Department of the Foreign Ministry. Mr. Gao said China had cut its coal production, to 992 million tons in 1999 from 1.4 billion in 1996. China continues to show relatively low gas emissions per capita. North America and Western Europe are the largest contributors, with the United States being the largest of all. A far greater number of proposed challenges to the summary report came from the American Petroleum Institute and oil companies like ExxonMobil, as well as from delegates from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.

Near the end of President Clinton's first term in office, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt presented him with a kind of environmental scorecard. At that moment, it made plain, Mr. Clinton's achievements were scant. The White House had lost its early battles with Congress over its environmental initiatives and in reaction had shied away from the issues as if from ''a childhood trauma,'' as one White House official put it. But in drawing up that scorecard, Mr. Babbitt also served up a challenge. Opposite the side reserved for Mr. Clinton he had pointedly listed the accomplishments of another American president, Theodore Roosevelt, remembered by historians as perhaps the greatest conservationist in American history. With a second term dawning, and questions about a Clinton legacy hanging in the air, Mr. Babbitt remembered this week, ''I thought maybe this would pique his interest.''Indeed it did. With the zeal of a boy learning a new game, Mr. Clinton soon began a headlong rush for the conservation record books, accomplished mostly by executive fiat. Not only did he eclipse Mr. Roosevelt's old mark in putting millions upon millions of acres of public land off limits to development, he continued to run up the score in his final days in office this week, announcing in his final public appearance at the White House the creation of six national monuments in the West, adding to more than a dozen he had already ordered be established or expanded. As his term runs out, those conservation steps and other achievements are being cited by environmental groups as worthy enough to rank Mr. Clinton among presidents as ''one of the great defenders of the environment,'' as Carl Pope, executive director of the Sierra Club, put it. But in his quest, Mr. Clinton also seemed to some of his critics as so enthralled with the symbolism of his actions that he ignored substantive  objections to them, perhaps to a great fault. At a time when American oil imports have reached a record level, the dominant chord of that criticism -- voiced, among others, by President-elect George W. Bush -- is that Mr. Clinton was wrong to erect new barriers around so much public land that may well hold valuable energy resources.''His greatest legacy at the end of the day really may be to leave the  nation without enough energy, in part by locking up public lands that have the necessary supplies,'' said William L. Kovacs, vice president for environmental affairs at the United States Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Bush, who has promised to shift the policy balance in a way that  allows more latitude for development, has signaled that he may try to void or chip away at some of what Mr. Clinton will leave behind. But polls leave little doubt that ideals like clean air and wild forests carry considerable public support, and after eight years in office, Mr. Clinton's departing environmental advisers say they are confident Mr. Bush would trample on the legacy only at his political peril.''Environmental protection is no longer just fuzzy creatures in pretty places,'' said Carol M. Browner, who headed the Environmental Protection Agency throughout Mr. Clinton's term. ''I think we've built a solid base of support for the steps we have taken.''Among the reasons for Mr. Clinton's slow start, his aides concede, was that he came to office with little passion for the environment. He was a golfer, not a hiker, and he came from Arkansas, where environmental protection had never registered much on his political radar. Then, in an early fight of its own picking, the administration lost badly in a battle with Western ranchers, who beat back an attempt to raise the below-market fees they pay for grazing rights on federal land. The setback was compounded by another loss, over a proposed energy tax, and with only two real exceptions -- a Congressional act protecting parts of the California desert, and an administration-brokered compromise over the spotted owl in the Pacific Northwest -- environmental issues fell to the back burner. But by late 1995, against a Republican-controlled Congress that was trying to roll back environmental regulations, Mr. Clinton's advisers began to see ways of using the issue to political advantage. A turning point, White House officials said, was the government shutdown that year, a direct result of Mr. Clinton's vetoing a bill that would have allowed oil drilling in Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.''By the end of 1995 and 1996 with the election, there was a view that action on the environment really was very possible,'' said George Frampton, the chairman of the White House Council on Environmental Quality. Within Mr. Clinton's cabinet, neither Mr. Babbitt nor Ms. Browner was particularly close to the president. On broad environmental issues, Mr. Clinton's single most important adviser, particularly on global warming, was Vice President Al Gore, who took the lead in hammering home the 1997 Kyoto accord on the reduction of so-called greenhouse gases, though that deal has yet to be ratified by Congress. On one important front, clean air, the rules used by the Environmental Protection Agency required no Congressional approval, and that allowed the E.P.A. under Ms. Browner to forge ahead on a plan that environmentalists have praised as the most important pollution-control development in a generation. With the tighter standards for tailpipe emission by cars that Mr. Clinton announced in 1999, and new standards for buses and big rigs that were made final late last year, the agency overcame industry opposition to put in place rules that experts say should make a marked difference in air quality over the next 10 years.''In the next decade, every person in this county will breathe cleaner air,' Ms. Browner said. Some of Mr. Clinton's most notable environmental initiatives came about only through close collaboration with Congress and the states, including a plan that secured the first down payment in an $8 billion plan to repair Florida's degraded Everglades system, and legislation that won the first financing for a Lands Legacy initiative that could ultimately deliver billions of dollars to states and communities to buy and set aside green spaces, wildlife habitats and parkland. But ultimately, Mr. Clinton's greatest success came in outflanking his opponents. And in that process the lead fell to Mr. Babbitt, the former Arizona governor, trained geologist, one-time presidential candidate,  finalist for a spot on the Supreme Court, and member of a prominent ranching family who used his plain-spoken manner and longtime knowledge of land issues to prod Mr. Clinton toward an aggressive course. The chosen instrument was the Antiquities Act of 1906, which gives a president the power to designate national monuments on his own accord,  thereby giving them nearly the same protection as if Congress had declared them national parks or wilderness areas. At Mr. Babbitt's urging, Mr. Clinton first used the act in 1996 in his designation of the Grand Staircase Escalante Monument in Utah --a step that caught the state's governor by surprise. And while the tactics were modified to include consultation, the top-down approach soon became a model for an administration that found unparalleled success in steering around Congressional and state opposition, when it came to setting aside vast areas of public land. The tactics -- including those used to put nearly one-third of the national forests off-limits to development, under a Forest Service rule made final this month -- have repeatedly left Mr. Clinton's opponents sputtering about what they called his unilateralism.''If these were good projects, why weren't they done sooner, and why haven't we seen members of Congress and governors up there saying this is a good policy, and we stand with him?'' asked Dirk Kempthorne, the governor of Idaho, whose state has filed suit to block the Forest Service plan. But Mr. Babbitt, who would periodically press copies of an updated  scorecard into Mr. Clinton's hand at their encounters, said the president  clearly took pride in what he was doing. ''He always wanted to know, 'How am I doing?' '' the interior secretary said. Along with 58 million acres of national forest protected from development, Mr. Clinton's plans have set aside more than eight million acres of land as new national monuments, and millions more underwater, as part of new protective areas. Except for Jimmy Carter, whose administration presided over Congressional action setting aside a large part of Alaska as wilderness, no other president, except for Mr. Roosevelt, has come close to that mark.''History will put him at the summit of American conservation with one other figure, Theodore Roosevelt,'' Mr. Babbitt said after handing Mr. Clinton his final scorecard this week. TRANSITION IN WASHINGTON: THE ENVIRONMENT

Ready or not, the Bush administration is going to find itself dealing with challenges to American safety and well-being that were not considered serious security threats during the last Republican administration eight years ago. Familiar issues like terrorism and nuclear proliferation now must share the foreign policy agenda with threats that carry no weapons. Environmental damage, water shortages, mass movements of refugees, overpopulation, infectious diseases and even third-world poverty all affect American security. Some of these problems can intrude on our soil. But all can lead to the kind of instability and conflict that has frequently warranted American intervention. Disease is the most immediate problem, and the one most likely to affect Americans directly. The world's poorest people are suffering from new diseases such as AIDS, more virulent strains of old sicknesses such as drug-resistant tuberculosis and an increase in illnesses once thought to be under control, such as malaria. Germs and viruses easily emigrate by plane. In the early 1990's, it cost $1 billion to eradicate 1,000 cases of resistant tuberculosis in New York City. Over the next 10 years, AIDS is likely to cripple the economies of many nations in sub-Saharan Africa. Millions of orphans are growing up on the streets. Entire countries may come to the brink of collapse as they lose their most economically active people. Waves of refugees could destabilize neighboring nations. Overpopulation and environmental devastation have already contributed to similar situations on a smaller scale. The Clinton administration intervened in Haiti largely to prevent a flood of new refugees in Florida. Haiti's criminal leadership was the immediate cause of the problem, but the country's rapid rates of population growth and deforestation contributed to its misery and the desire of Haitians to flee. Similar problems fueled conflict in Somalia, Rwanda and other countries. Since it is difficult to arouse sufficient interest in these problems before they become catastrophes, Washington has normally waited until a crisis develops before taking action. George W. Bush would be well served to invest in alleviating problems before they require large infusions of money or even the introduction of American military forces. Washington, for example, should help rebuild the health system in Russia, which now has one of the world's fastest-growing rates of H.I.V. infection and an epidemic of drug-resistant tuberculosis. Mr. Bush should also treat AIDS in Africa as a security threat. The United Nations estimates that it would take $1.5 billion to institute effective prevention campaigns all over Africa, and the same amount to care for AIDS patients and their orphans. Health officials believe that AIDS can be treated in Africa with the same medicines Americans get if the West helps pay. Working with European nations on these problems now could save millions of lives and billions of dollars later. The Bush administration could also help prevent future problems by endorsing the 1997 Kyoto accord on greenhouse gases. An authoritative report has concluded that man-made gases contributed substantially to the rise in temperature over the last 50 years. Global warming, many experts believe, has led to devastating floods and hurricanes in tropical areas, and could eventually produce drought in America's breadbasket. Mr. Bush and Republicans in Congress must balance their desire to protect the profits of American businesses with a determination to set emission and other environmental standards that reduce the production of harmful gases. Dealing with problems like disease and environmental destruction will require foresight, creativity and a willingness to take political risks. They are often called ''soft'' security threats, but today they can pose a greater worldwide danger than anything that comes from the barrel of a gun.

An influential panel of scientists is preparing to endorse two strategies for curtailing global warming that have been major points of contention between the United States and Europe in efforts to complete a climate treaty. In a report scheduled for next month, the panel concludes that by protecting existing forests and planting new ones, countries could blunt warming by sopping up 10 to 20 percent of the heat-trapping carbon dioxide that is expected to be released by smokestacks and tailpipes over the next 50 years. It also says the cost to industrialized countries of a global climate plan could be cut in half if they were allowed to buy and sell credits earned by those that make the deepest reductions in carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases. The conclusions could bolster the position of the United States when negotiations over details of the treaty resume this summer. But some experts involved in the talks stressed that a scientific analysis of untested climate-control strategies says little about whether such efforts would prove effective.''The big question is whether real programs in the real world will work,'' said Dr. Daniel A. Lashof, a senior scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private environmental group. ''The devil's in the details.''The report was written by a working group within the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a network of hundreds of scientists who advise governments on climate issues under the auspices of the United Nations. The group plans to release it at a meeting in Ghana. A final draft was recently sent to governments for comment, and a copy was given to The New York Times by an American official. The panel's findings are closely watched by governments as a barometer of mainstream scientific thinking on global warming. A report by another working group last month concluded that the burning of fossil fuels and other human activities are responsible for most of a one-degree rise in average global temperatures measured in the last 50 years. This was the first time the 12-year-old panel found that human actions were the dominant force behind the recent warming. The climate treaty, the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, would require 38 industrial countries to cut emissions of greenhouse gases by 2012 to 5 percent below emission levels in 1990. It has been signed by more than 100 countries but lacks fine print and has not yet been ratified. Negotiations over details broke down at a tumultuous meeting in November in The Hague when the European Union rejected an American proposal calling for trading in credits for emissions reductions and granting credit for planting forests and crops. The report lends some new credence to the American positions. According to the panel, ''Forests, agricultural lands and other terrestrial ecosystems offer significant, if often temporary, mitigation potential.''Even if the carbon taken from atmospheric carbon dioxide is eventually released again from plants or soil, the report said, ''conservation and sequestration allow time for other options to be further developed and implemented.''The scientists added that if the rules for such living carbon reservoirs were right, they could also preserve endangered species and improve water quality. The European Union and some private environmental groups have opposed giving credit for forest planting, saying it could take the pressure off industrial countries to cut emissions from the source: vehicles, power plants and industry. In The Hague, the United States scaled back the amount of credit it sought for farm and forest changes, but American negotiators and many representatives in Congress say this remains an essential component of the final Kyoto treaty. Trading of emissions credits is equally contentious. Such trading is a way of encouraging the greatest cuts in pollution where they can be done most cheaply. In theory, under such a program the United States or another wealthy country -- either directly or indirectly -- could get credit toward greenhouse-gas targets by investing in new, efficient power plants in, say, Eastern Europe. The new plants would represent a big leap in performance over old, pollution-belching plants there, proponents of trading say. Building similar plants in the United States would cost more and would result in a smaller improvement in emissions. According to the new report, a variety of economic models predict that a climate plan without trading among industrialized countries would result in a range of losses to their gross domestic products of anywhere from two-tenths of 1 percent to 2.2 percent. Under a climate plan with emissions trading, the range of losses could be cut in half. Over all, the report says, even in the middle of this range of possible losses, costs of adjusting power plants and other sources of greenhouse emissions would be small enough that no substantial economic harm would result. On one point, the scientific panel, some environmental groups and some industry officials all agree: To make emissions trading work, there must be clear, enforced rules and an accurate way of measuring changes in gas emissions.''If you don't have a system that's legitimate and verifiable, there's tremendous potential for gaming the system,'' said Dale E. Heydlauff, senior vice president for environmental affairs of American Electric Power, a $12-billion-a-year energy company that supports trading under the climate treaty. But some environmental groups insist that there is a moral obligation for countries to make a significant amount of their emissions reductions at home.''From the European perspective, we think that should be a priority,'' said Frances MacGuire, the climate change policy director in the London office of Friends of the Earth. ''There is a place for trading, but it shouldn't be without limit.''

The Bush administration is only slowly turning to climate issues and so is being left on the sidelines in international talks that could shape a treaty curtailing global warming, say government officials and executives involved in the discussions. At the administration's request, United Nations officials agreed on Monday to delay the next round of formal treaty negotiations, earlier  set for May, until June or July. But other meetings and informal international discussions that could significantly shape the final agreement are taking place weekly, and the treaty is expected to be a central topic at a meeting of environment ministers from the Group of 8 industrialized nations that begins in Trieste, Italy, on March 2. The State Department thanked the United Nations on Tuesday for agreeing to the delay in climate-treaty bargaining, and said it would ''shortly begin a review of its policy toward the international climate change negotiations.''But critics, who include industry executives and some environmental lobbyists, say the administration is betraying a lack of urgency. ''Damage is being done right now,'' said a Washington lobbyist for foreign oil exporters, who spoke only on condition of anonymity. ''Although efforts have been made to alert the administration that there's a whole bunch of stuff going on, there doesn't seem to have been a disciplined effort to cope with that circumstance.''Oddly, it is not environmental campaigners who have expressed the most impatience, even though new scientific reports have shown the strongest link yet between recent warming and rising emissions of greenhouse gases. Rather, the frustration is coming mainly from some Republican officials and representatives of energy-related businesses, who see huge costs resulting from the climate treaty, named the Kyoto Protocol for the Japanese city where its outlines were negotiated in 1997. These critics say the administration has essentially been mute in the face of day-to-day events including  informal planning sessions for this summer's negotiations that took place at the United Nations last week. An influential scientific advisory panel that issued the recent reports strengthening the tie between warming and emissions is also  releasing reports next Monday in Geneva and later this month in Accra, Ghana, and the final wording of such reports is often influenced by comments offered by governments. Some people who oppose the Kyoto agreement say the scientific reports, by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a body operating under United Nations auspices, are tending toward the sensational in hopes of energizing efforts to complete the treaty. One senator involved with the issue, Chuck Hagel, a Nebraska Republican who sees warming as a significant problem but has been critical of the treaty, said both the right and the left should give Bush administration officials more time.  ''Everyone should throttle down and back a little bit,'' he said in an interview. ''These guys are going to get their arms around this. They understand this is an important issue.''The Kyoto Protocol has been signed by more than 100 countries but has not been ratified by any industrialized nation. Its final adoption would require the United States and three dozen other industrialized countries to cut combined emissions of greenhouse gases by 2012 to 5 percent below their 1990 levels. The United States, which produces a fourth of the world's emissions with 5 percent of the world's population, stands to be affected most by any final agreement. Bargaining broke down in November at The Hague, where the European Union rejected a compromise on sticking points that was offered by the United States and several other participants. In a turnabout from a spate of recent criticism of President Bush on other conservation matters, some environmental groups are giving him more room this time around, saying the complaints from conservative corners may be intended to prompt him to discard quickly the years of work invested in the treaty. They do say they are irked that Mr. Bush, quick to create a high-level team to develop new sources of oil and other fossil fuels, has not made any announcements about how the country will deal with the emissions from burning those fuels. But with regard to the treaty, at least, no news is good news, said Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. Ms. Claussen and some other environmentalists point to several moves that imply the administration is going to take the treaty seriously. For example, Ian Bowles, the senior director for environmental affairs at the National Security Council during the Clinton administration, has been retained for the time being by the Bush team. There is a decent chance, environmental groups say, that upon reflection Mr. Bush will see merits in taking a historically aggressive stance on a strategic issue -- in this case the global environment -- much as another Republican president, Richard M. Nixon, did when he went to China.''I'd rather that they be thoughtful about it before they make up their mind,'' Ms. Claussen said, ''rather than rush to judgment, particularly if it's the wrong judgment.''

Scientists meeting in San Francisco a week ago  heard a startling prediction: the seemingly indestructible snows of Kilimanjaro that inspired Ernest Hemingway's famous short story may well disappear in the next 15 years. To most mainstream scientists, the rapid erosion of Kilimanjaro's majestic ice cap, along with the steady retreat of mountaintop glaciers elsewhere, is further dramatic evidence of a relentless warming of the earth's atmosphere that cannot be explained by normal climate shifts and is at least partly traceable to the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil. This depressing news might also inspire President Bush to pay attention to an issue he has lately avoided. Mr. Bush has asked Vice President Dick Cheney and a blue-ribbon team to devise an energy strategy, which will almost certainly recommend a more aggressive search for oil and gas. Yet so far as is known, he has not asked anyone to figure out how the country should deal with the consequences of burning those fuels. To be sure, the Bush team is new on the job. For that reason, the United Nations has agreed to delay until May the next round of formal negotiations over the Kyoto Protocol, the draft treaty on global warming negotiated in 1997. It is also true that this is the sort of issue that generates no enthusiasm in Congress and disappears from public consciousness at the first cold snap -- meaning that it is precisely the kind of issue that requires presidential leadership. Mr. Bush cannot afford to wait forever to provide that leadership. Each month seems to bring  new and stronger evidence that warming is occurring, that human activities are behind it and that the consequences for future generations could be catastrophic. In January, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the most authoritative voice on the issue, warned that warming over the next century would increase more than originally thought, from a minimum of 2.7 degrees to a truly unnerving 10.4 degrees. It also concluded that human actions were largely responsible. In a follow-up report released last week, the panel identified short-term consequences like shrinking glaciers, vanishing coral reefs and changing seasons, and it warned of much bigger problems down the road -- rising oceans, violent floods and the spread of diseases like cholera and malaria, especially in poorer countries that are least able to defend themselves. President Clinton got nowhere in his efforts to persuade an indifferent Congress to institute the efficiency and anti-pollution measures necessary to curb the nation's appetite for fossil fuels. But he did leave behind the Kyoto Protocol, an agreement among industrialized nations to cut combined emissions of greenhouse gases to about 5 percent below their 1990 levels by 2012. Many details need to be worked out, but if the protocol is ever to become a binding treaty, the United States will have to take the lead, not least because it produces one-fourth of the world's greenhouse emissions with only 5 percent of its population. For much the same reason, of course, this country will also bear the biggest costs in terms of investing in cleaner fuels and cleaner plants. Mr. Bush opposes the Kyoto agreement, partly because he thinks it unfairly burdens the United States. But if he reads the treaty carefully, he will find that it explicitly favors this country because it includes various mechanisms, like emissions trading, that would enable the United States to meet its targets without crippling investments at the source. Mr. Bush has in fact been less dismissive of the problem than some of his aides. He has endorsed the idea of regulating carbon dioxide, the main global-warming gas and one of the few pollutants not covered by the Clean Air Act. And in a policy paper provided to the New York Academy of Sciences before the election, he promised to work for a ''comprehensive, fair and effective agreement.'' There are even a few hopeful environmentalists who think that Mr. Bush, given his credibility with American industry, will have a better chance than Al Gore would have had of getting something done on an issue that needs bipartisan support. But so far he has not even made a start.

The Bush administration, some influential Republicans in Congress and several big owners of coal-burning power plants have joined in advocating something long sought by environmental groups and Democrats: cuts in the plants' emissions of carbon dioxide, a heat-trapping greenhouse gas widely thought to contribute to a global warming trend. The cuts would come as part of a larger bill controlling carbon dioxide and three other emissions from the power plants: sulfur dioxide, which causes acid rain; nitrogen oxides, which contribute to smog; and mercury, a toxic heavy metal. Mr. Bush promised in his campaign last fall to seek such a bill, and Christie Whitman, the new administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, has reasserted that pledge in recent days. Cuts would constitute the nation's first restrictions on carbon dioxide, a gas that has no direct effect on human health -- in fact, it is the bubbles in beer -- but that many scientists have concluded is already altering ecosystems and weather patterns as it accumulates in the atmosphere. But the prospect has spawned a fierce lobbying effort by conservative Republicans and some coal, oil and industry groups, which are urging Mr. Bush to abandon his campaign stance and any mention of carbon dioxide. The opponents say laws requiring carbon dioxide cuts would harm the economy and clash with the administration's goal of raising supplies of fossil fuels.''This is a colossal mistake,'' said Myron Ebell, director of global warming policy for the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a Washington group that advocates free markets and limited regulation and has attacked the administration recently. ''If they persist, there will be war.''Still, many people on both sides of the issue say chances have never been better for legislation to limit the emissions from power plants, which produce about 40 percent of the nation's carbon dioxide output. Mr. Bush's commitment on carbon dioxide -- articulated in a couple of short sentences deep in an energy policy paper released on Sept. 29 -- was a sharp shift for a politician who had long avoided making definitive statements on the seriousness of global warming. The change went largely unnoticed in the campaign, but has now bubbled up like a suddenly opened bottle of warm seltzer because of a confluence of recent events. First, several Republicans in important positions in Congress are preparing to propose power-plant legislation that would limit carbon dioxide, most significantly Senator Bob Smith, a New Hampshire Republican who is chairman of the Senate Environment Committee. Mr. Smith and other proponents of the bill say the bill is needed to simplify life for utilities facing a growing, unpredictable maze of federal and state laws governing all manner of emissions. At the same time, the energy task force, headed by Vice President Dick Cheney, is rushing to complete its initial plan for turning Mr. Bush's promises on energy and the environment into programs. And legislatures in many states where air pollution is an issue -- including New Hampshire, Ohio, Wisconsin and Michigan -- are moving toward passage of bills that limit the four emissions. Growing numbers of power-plant operators now regard as inevitable some sort of restrictions, and would prefer one federal standard to a patchwork of confusing regulations. Some environmental advocates, Democrats and moderate Republicans say that Mr. Bush's support for a comprehensive bill could provide crucial momentum. Past efforts foundered because of the political divide between the Clinton administration and Congress.''Having George W. Bush seriously looking at carbon dioxide as part of a four-pollutant approach on power plants really demonstrates that you can't ignore CO2  any more,'' said Jennifer L. Morgan, climate policy director for one conservation group, the World Wildlife Fund. Opponents of the legislation include coal and oil companies, business groups, and conservatives in Congress who doubt that climate change poses a significant threat and fear that restrictions on utilities would be costly -- and would eventually be applied to other carbon dioxide sources, notably cars and trucks. More than half the nation's electricity is produced by burning coal, which generates the most carbon dioxide per watt of any fuel. So any restrictions on carbon dioxide would probably lead to a shift toward other options, like natural gas, and would inevitably have some economic impact, though estimates range widely. Some conservatives also fear that any greenhouse-gas limits would signal that the Bush administration is planning to complete the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty negotiated under the Clinton administration that would commit the United States and 37 other industrialized countries to larger cuts in greenhouse gases. The treaty has not yet been ratified by any industrialized country. Negotiations about vital details broke down in November and are scheduled to resume in July. During the campaign, Mr. Bush criticized the treaty, saying that it would harm the economy by raising fuel prices and that it unfairly excluded large developing countries like China and India from obligations to reduce their gas releases. A task force within the administration is reviewing its stance on the treaty and other climate issues. But last week, Mrs. Whitman told a gathering of environment ministers from the Group of 8 -- the leading economic powers and Russia -- that the review ''does not represent a backing away from Kyoto.''Perhaps the strongest proponent of controlling greenhouse gases within the administration is Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill. As chairman of Alcoa, he spoke forcefully of the threat posed by the atmosphere's carbon dioxide levels, which have risen 25 percent since the late 1800's. ''There is no doubt about this issue,'' he said in a 1998 speech. Despite the intensifying effort to sway Mr. Bush from the power-plant bill, supporters of the legislation say that if it is written the right way it can eventually be passed with the president's support. They point to the unequivocal language used in Mr. Bush's Sept. 29 position paper, which stated that he would seek legislation that would ''establish mandatory reduction targets for emissions of four main pollutants: sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, mercury and carbon dioxide.''Not only that, proponents say, the same paper promoted the difference between his mandatory cuts and the proposal of his rival. ''Vice President Gore has advocated only a voluntary program,'' Mr. Bush said. One impediment to a bill is a sharp battle line drawn by some in industry against language that would label carbon dioxide as pollution. That classification would bring it under the umbrella of the Clean Air Act. But a bill could be written that controls the gas while stating it is not a ''pollutant,'' according to William F. Tyndall, vice president for environmental services and federal affairs at the Cinergy Corporation, a power company based in Cincinnati that has a fleet of coal-fired plants around the Midwest but supports a comprehensive plant cleanup.''We've been promoting this idea and see it as an elegant solution to a very difficult situation,'' Mr. Tyndall said. ''I think it has a real shot.''Cinergy, American Electric Power -- a huge coal-dependent midwestern power company -- and some other utilities say they would accede to the limits in the expectation that the bill would provide flexibility. That could come in the form of allowing utilities to trade emissions credits earned by reducing emissions or planting forests, which sop up carbon dioxide through photosynthesis and store the carbon in wood and soil. Just as important, Mr. Tyndall said, such a bill would eliminate uncertainty about future regulation, making it much easier for a company to decide which of its existing power plants to improve, which to shift to cleaner fuels like natural gas, and which to shut down. For the moment, the White House is giving no signal about whether it will stick with the campaign position, with the first glimpse of its policy likely to come when Mr. Cheney's task force provides its initial findings on how to restore the country's energy balance. That report could be completed later this month. In the meantime, opponents have built up their pressure, most visibly in sharp attacks on Mrs. Whitman for reaffirming in recent statements Mr. Bush's pledge to include carbon dioxide in a cleanup of power plants. One e-mail message distributed recently to Congress, reporters and a list of conservatives by the Greening Earth Society, a group financed by coal-based utilities, described Mrs. Whitman as Christine Todd Browner -- an allusion to Carol M. Browner, the E.P.A. administrator under President Clinton. Yesterday, though, officials at the White House and E.P.A. said that Mrs. Whitman had not been pressured to change her remarks, though  she was apparently nudged gently to tone things down.''They are backing her up,'' said an E.P.A. official, referring to White House officials. ''No one is telling her not to speak. Everything she said was in his campaign message. They're just saying let's have some caution in the public statements until we are finished with this review.''

Under strong pressure from conservative Republicans and industry groups, President Bush reversed a campaign pledge today and said his administration would not seek to regulate power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide, a gas that many scientists say is a key contributor to global warming. The decision left environmental groups and some Congressional Democrats angered at what they called a major betrayal. But the White House said a cabinet-level review had concluded that Mr. Bush's original promise had been a mistake inconsistent with the broader goal of increasing domestic energy production. The president outlined his new view in a letter to four Republican senators, whose criticisms of Mr. Bush's initial plan had been among a torrent of protests by conservatives and industry leaders who warned that any effort to regulate carbon dioxide emissions could deal a severe blow to the energy industry and to the American economy. As recently as 10 days ago, Christie Whitman, the new administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, had described Mr. Bush's campaign promise as if it were already policy. Administration officials would not say directly today whether Ms. Whitman had supported the change in position but suggested that she had not. They said the views of Vice President Dick Cheney and Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham had been most instrumental in the final decision. A spokeswoman for Ms. Whitman, Tina Kreisher, said the E.P.A. chief would ''follow the president's lead.''The burden of any plan to regulate carbon dioxide emissions would have fallen most heavily on coal-burning power plants, which still account for more than 50 percent of the electricity generated in the United States.  Mr. Bush said today that a recent Energy Department study had concluded that regulating carbon dioxide emissions would have led to ''significantly higher electricity prices.''''This is important new information that warrants a re-evaluation, especially at a time of rising energy prices and a serious energy shortage,'' Mr. Bush said.''At a time when California has already experienced energy shortages, and other Western states are worried about price and availability of energy this summer, we must be very careful not to take actions that could harm consumers,'' Mr. Bush said in the letter. ''This is especially true given the incomplete state of scientific knowledge of the causes of, and solutions to, global climate change and the lack of commercially available technologies for removing and storing carbon dioxide.''Mr. Bush said he remained committed to an energy policy that would seek to improve air quality by reducing emissions of nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide and mercury, which are already regulated as pollutants. But he said he no longer supported the position outlined in a campaign statement of Sept. 29, which had also promised to set ''mandatory reduction targets'' for carbon dioxide. Some moderate Republicans who had been preparing to introduce legislation later this week supporting a power plant cleanup including carbon dioxide also expressed frustration with the sudden shift. They and some owners of coal-fired plants had supported the idea of regulating all four emissions from power plants at once, to avoid uncertainty and confusion in years to come. The pressure to make the decision came in part from lobbyists for coal companies and utilities dependent on coal and from the conservative wing of the Republican Party, which saw any move to regulate carbon dioxide as an implicit endorsement of the goals of the Kyoto Protocol. This treaty, negotiated and signed by the Clinton administration but as yet unratified, would commit 38 industrialized countries to sharp ongoing cuts in carbon dioxide emissions. Many senators, particularly Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, oppose it as a a potential harm to the economy and because it would allow American energy policy, in essence, to be governed by an international treaty. The letter was sent to Mr. Helms, Mr. Hagel, Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas and Senator Larry E. Craig of Idaho. Mr. Bush's earlier embrace of the plan had won him praise from environmental leaders, who described the approach as an indication that the administration might be more sympathetic than they had expected. The representatives of environmental organizations denounced Mr. Bush's turnabout.''Bush is turning his back not only on his campaign pledge, but on his administrator of the E.P.A. and the world's scientists, who warn this problem is more serious than we previously thought,'' said Daniel A. Lashof, a senior scientist for the Natural Resources Defense Council. In the offices of industry lobbyists and conservative Republican congressmen, on the other hand, there was a strong sense of triumph. Glenn Kelly, the executive director of the Global Climate Coalition, which represents industry groups, said the White House had received ''a lot of communications'' from those critical of any attempt to regulate emissions that are viewed as contributing to global warming. ''Fortunately, the president responded quickly,'' Mr. Kelly said. Mr. Bush's earlier position had been more far-reaching even than that of his campaign opponent, former Vice President Al Gore, who had called for strong incentives to encourage voluntary moves by industry to reduce emissions. The letter from Mr. Bush came in response to a letter sent last week by Senator Hagel, requesting that Mr. Bush clarify his stance. Mr. Hagel has repeatedly said in recent months that he believes global warming is at least partly caused by emissions of gases from human activities, but he has opposed both the Kyoto Protocol and legislative moves to limit carbon dioxide emissions. Tonight, Mr. Hagel said he welcomed Mr. Bush's response. A number of members of Congress, including Senators James M. Jeffords, Republican of Vermont, and Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat, are preparing various power plant bills that would have included carbon dioxide among regulated emissions. Tonight staff for the bill sponsors said identical bills would still be introduced in the Senate and House on Thursday, but they conceded that there was little hope, at least for now, that such measures could succeed. Many people involved on both sides of the fight said the decision by Mr. Bush represented a sharp rebuke of Ms. Whitman, the former New Jersey governor. Among others in the administration who had been seen as supporting restrictions on carbon dioxide was the Treasury secretary, Paul H. O'Neill, who in his previous post as chairman of Alcoa had said in a 1998 speech that the problem of global warming was on par with a potential nuclear holocaust in terms of demanding government action. Ms. Kreisher, Ms. Whitman's spokeswoman, said: ''The administrator has said in the past that President Bush regards climate change very seriously and supports a comprehensive, balanced energy policy that is intended to improve air quality, and the administrator is gratified that he supports that.''A senior E.P.A. official who spoke on condition of anonymity, however, left little doubt that the turnabout had left Ms. Whitman exposed. ''If you look at her past statements, she said she was supporting what was in the president's campaign plan,'' the official said. ''It's his prerogative to decide if he wants to change that, and she will follow his lead.''A White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, said Mr. Bush had made his decision in consultation with his cabinet.''The president is following through on his commitment to a multipollutant strategy that will significantly reduce pollutants,'' Mr. McClellan said. ''CO2  should not have been included as a pollutant during the campaign. It was a mistake.''

President Bush's decision not to regulate emissions of carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas, does more than betray a campaign promise. It embarrasses the administrator of his Environmental Protection Agency, Christie Whitman, angers the Europeans and creates needless headaches for his secretary of state, Colin Powell. It also undercuts some of his natural allies in the energy industry who have been willing to go out on a limb in favor of a more aggressive strategy. During a broad policy speech on energy last Sept. 29, Mr. Bush promised to ''establish mandatory reduction targets'' for emissions of four major pollutants, including carbon dioxide, a gas that has never been regulated under the federal Clean Air Act. In later remarks, Mr. Bush made quite a point of the fact that he was calling for mandatory targets, whereas Al Gore was asking for only voluntary reductions. Because the burden of regulating carbon emissions would fall most heavily on coal-burning power plants, the coal producers and some utilities urged Mr. Bush to change his mind. But his campaign stance delighted most atmospheric scientists, who believe that warming over the next century will increase far more than was originally thought, with potentially devastating consequences to the natural systems in some regions. European leaders, persuaded by the gathering evidence on the causes and dangers of global warming, have been urging the United States to help put some teeth into the Kyoto Protocol, the draft agreement to curb greenhouse gases negotiated in 1997.  Meanwhile, the country's more progressive utilities, like Consolidated Edison and New Jersey's Public Service Electric and Gas, are on record as favoring clear targets and timetables for carbon dioxide as part of a multipollutant approach that would create a more predictable regulatory climate and a surer guide to making costly pollution-control investments. Indeed, as recently as 10 days ago, Ms. Whitman was describing Mr. Bush's campaign promise as if it were already policy. Then came the president's  reversal. In a letter to four Republican senators who had criticized the Kyoto agreement, Mr. Bush said he would proceed with plans for further cuts in sulfur dioxide, which causes acid rain, and nitrogen oxides, which contribute to smog, as well as with new regulations on mercury emissions. But carbon dioxide was off the table, for two main reasons. One was that the science about global warming was ''incomplete,'' by which he meant that it was insufficient as a basis for taking action. That was an astonishing statement in view of the recent documentation assembled by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The second was that reducing emissions would require converting older coal-fired plants to natural gas, which, in turn, could ''harm consumers'' by causing a spike in gas prices -- as California's energy crisis has demonstrated. This was a particularly slippery piece of reasoning. It is true that switching fuels will be necessary and costly. But by cynically invoking the California crisis and the specter of sudden price spikes, Mr. Bush made it sound as if a policy aimed at gradual reductions in carbon dioxide emissions would have an immediate and devastating effect on American consumers and the economy. Despite Mr. Bush's protestations to the contrary yesterday, one can conclude only that political considerations carried the day. His reversal came as a shock to moderate Republicans like Senator Jim Jeffords of Vermont and Representative Sherwood Boehlert of New York, who were preparing to join Democrats in a bipartisan effort to reduce  carbon dioxide emissions in power plants over the next six years. They should push ahead anyway. At the moment, Mr. Bush's evolving energy strategy seems to consist largely of finding new sources of energy without giving any real thought to their global consequences.

Defending his reversal of a campaign pledge, President Bush said today that ''an energy crisis'' that threatened the nation's economic health caused him to decide not to try to regulate power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide.''I was responding to realities, and the reality is our nation has a real problem when it comes to energy,'' Mr. Bush told reporters in New Jersey today. White House officials said any plan to limit emissions of the gas, widely seen as a contributor to global warming, would have pushed electricity prices up, and could have compounded energy shortages like those being felt in California. They said Mr. Bush  decided on Monday, hours before the White House announced the move, after concluding a week ago that the promise he had made in the campaign was ''an error.''But many of Mr. Bush's supporters outside the White House said they had little doubt that the president's move also reflected the power of a last-minute pressure campaign from Congressional Republicans and industry leaders. Among the top corporate officials said by Washington lobbyists to have been in direct contact with either the president or Vice President Dick Cheney to win the turnabout was Tom Kuhn, a close friend of Mr. Bush's who is president of the Edison Electric Institute, the power plants' main lobbying organization.''We had been convinced that we were done for,'' a top industry lobbyist said today of what he said was widespread resignation that Mr. Bush would honor his campaign promise, which called for mandatory reductions in power plants' emissions of the gas. Characterizing the lobbying of the last several weeks, this industry official said, ''The very top people on our side were talking to the very highest levels of the administration.''Among people critical of Mr. Bush's move, several suggested in particular today that his diagnosis of ''energy crisis'' was overstated and was being offered at least in part as a cover for a decision driven by a desire to satisfy the oil and coal industries, the biggest beneficiaries of his decision, as well as to preserve good ties with their supporters on Capitol Hill.''In every energy decision, politics plays a big role,'' said Bill Richardson, who was the Clinton administration's last energy secretary. ''But the emissions decision is a particularly unfortunate one because it basically says we're for coal and not for any alternative, including natural gas, which should be our future source of energy in this country.''A decision to regulate power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide would have been felt most heavily by coal- and oil-burning plants, which are the largest emitters of the gas among the electric utilities. The adoption of the standards would have almost certainly resulted in a shift toward more widespread use of natural gas, a cleaner fuel, in power generation. White House officials said today that such a shift would have taken place too quickly for the natural gas industry to come up with the supplies necessary to meet the new demand, and that higher prices would have resulted. But Skip Horvath, president of the Natural Gas Supply Association, said his industry regarded Mr. Bush's decision as a mistake.''The policy seems to view a shift toward natural gas use as some kind of problem, and it seems to us that natural gas is the solution,'' Mr. Horvath said. The energy problems now facing California have little to do with oil and coal because most of the state's electricity is generated from hydropower, nuclear power and natural-gas fired plants. But White House officials said Mr. Bush's comments about ''an energy crisis'' reflected a broader concern about the need to expand the domestic energy supply, by increasing production and use of all possible sources. Mr. Bush's decision was warmly welcomed today by spokesmen for the oil and gas industries, as well as by a top official of the United States Chamber of Commerce, which had warned that any regulation of carbon dioxide emissions could have hurt  the economy.''It's very positive in that they've balanced environmental needs against our needs for energy security, and the decision is going to mean that we can both protect and begin increasing our domestic energy supplies,'' said the official, William L. Kovacs, the industry group's vice president for environment, technology and regulatory affairs. The pressure on the White House to reverse Mr. Bush's decision began early this month, after Christie Whitman, the new administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, began publicly to describe the president's campaign pledge as if it were already policy. Four Republican senators strongly opposed to regulation of carbon dioxide emissions, led by Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, then sent Mr. Bush a letter asking that he clarify his position. That set in motion an internal White House review and the furious lobbying effort that culminated in the policy shift on Tuesday, White House and industry officials said.''It was very good that they made a swift decision here, rather than let this issue fester and fester,'' said John Grasser, a spokesman for the National Mining Association, the coal industry's main representative. Environmentalists have been sharply critical of Mr. Bush's move, and some elaborated on their criticisms today, saying that the president had passed up an important chance to address the most dire problem facing the environment.''The energy crisis we have is a short-term phenomenon, but the global warming phenomenon is a long-term issue, and what's important is to begin to put in place a solution that will reduce our consumption of fossil fuels and cut our emissions of carbon dioxide,'' said Michael Oppenheimer, chief scientist for Environmental Defense, a New York-based environmental group. A former Clinton administration official who was one of the chief State Department negotiators in recent talks aimed at completing a global warming treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, said today that Mr. Bush's decision would undercut efforts to find a solution to the problem.''The only silver lining I can see here is that it makes things so stark and clear,'' said the official, David B. Sandalow. ''There's not ambiguity, no attempt to greenwash this. He's just going back on his promise.''

President Bush's reversal this week on a pledge to cut power plant emissions highlights the difficulty of controlling carbon dioxide, a seemingly benign ingredient of the air people exhale, but also, many scientists say, a chief cause of global warming. A growing body of research has concluded that carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases appear responsible for at least half of a warming trend over the last 50 years and pose a threat to ecosystems, water supplies, coastlines and tropical agriculture in the new century. Advocates on each side of the issue point to a long, varied list of factors  that have stalled efforts to control carbon dioxide in the United States and worldwide. These vary from the political influence of industries and energy companies that have plants that release the gas to the lack of any clear and present harm from the increase in carbon dioxide that has already occurred: a 25 percent gain since the late 1800's, almost all of it from smokestacks and tailpipes. But the chief sticking point is simply that carbon dioxide -- unlike more familiar forms of pollution, which can be filtered -- is for the moment an unavoidable byproduct of burning fuels, particularly fossil fuels, and especially the biggest source, coal. That means, as Mr. Bush stated this week in reversing his campaign promise, almost any effort to cut emissions must curtail the use of coal, which now supplies 56 percent of the country's electricity. And that means it would cost a lot of money. The cost is important not only to the domestic debate over the need for a law cleaning up power plants, but also to negotiations over the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 treaty that would, if ratified, commit 38 industrialized countries to reduce greenhouse emissions. Each country, in calculating the merits of reductions, has a different estimate of how it would affect the economy. Those dependent on coal -- the United States, for example -- see mainly economic peril in a binding treaty. Those that generate most of their electricity with carbonless nuclear power -- France, for example -- are less likely to resist. But the cost is only one side of the calculus that leads either to action or inaction to blunt climate change, environmental experts say. The other is weighing risk: risk to health, ecosystems, agriculture and the like. Countries or communities generally have to perceive some definable threat on a clear timetable to be prompted to act to repel the threat or at least to invest in an insurance policy. In the past, pollution problems were almost always attacked only after those two conditions were satisfied. Lead was removed from gasoline because levels in blood were high. As unleaded gasoline became the norm, lead levels in blood sharply dropped. Other air pollutants -- like soot, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides -- leave discernible fingerprints: grimy windows, sterilized mountain lakes downwind from power plants or eye-burning clouds of smog. In contrast, carbon dioxide, as opponents of cuts like to point out, is harder to cast as a villain. In fact, the skeptics say, no clear evidence exists that a crime has been committed. The gas is, after all, the substance that plants transform through photosynthesis into corn, pansies and rosewood. Finally, in instances where scientists say they have measured its effects, they are always secondary, indirect, and often far, far away from where most of the earth's human population is located. The most recent findings have come from melting mountain glaciers and satellites monitoring an increase in the amount of heat trapped in the upper atmosphere as greenhouse gases build. These are hardly the kinds of effects that are quick to generate a call for new laws or global treaties that could raise energy costs. A lack of urgency and a focus on costs both contributed to the breakdown of talks on the Kyoto in The Hague last November. The shift this week by Mr. Bush has, according to a variety of battle-worn veterans of the climate wars, threatened prospects for the next round of treaty talks, which are scheduled to take place in Bonn in July. The White House action left opponents of controls on carbon dioxide doing the e-mail equivalent of high-fives. On Tuesday night, the Cooler Heads Coalition, an informal network of groups opposing cuts in greenhouse gases, sent an urgent Internet alert from its chairman, Myron Ebell. ''We have won a famous victory, and everyone should congratulate themselves,'' he wrote. Still, some supporters of controlling carbon dioxide say they are confident that momentum will eventually swing their way, though perhaps slower than they would like. Sherwood L. Boehlert, a moderate Republican congressman who was first elected to represent Utica, N.Y., in 1982, said it took eight years of fighting for acid rain controls to be added to the Clean Air Act in 1990. Power plant emissions of the offending compounds, nitrogen oxides, have dropped but remain too high, Mr. Boehlert said.''And I still have some colleagues in the House telling me it's a figment of my imagination,'' he said. The same timetable is likely to hold true for actions to curtail global warming, said Mr. Boehlert, one of a small but growing minority of Republican officials seeking limits on carbon dioxide along with other air kinds of air pollution. Yesterday, undeterred by Mr. Bush's decision and a near certain prospect of failure, Mr. Boehlert and a bipartisan group of colleagues introduced House and Senate bills calling for exactly what the president rejected -- adding carbon dioxide to the list of power plant emissions to be cut.

Efforts to complete the Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement intended to curtail global warming, have been seriously damaged by President Bush this week, negotiators and independent experts on the treaty say. The protocol, signed by the United States and more than 100 other countries but not yet ratified, was already in trouble, with the last round of talks concerning details of the agreement collapsing last November. But when Mr. Bush issued a letter on Tuesday that renounced his campaign promise to cut carbon-dioxide emissions from power plants, he delivered what could be the coup de grce, said many foreign government officials, some White House ones and others involved in the talks. Some say this may be just as well, because the pact, negotiated in 1997 in Japan, contains targets for cutting emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases that are nearly unreachable because of rapid recent growth in many economies and energy use in many nations. Others say there are ways to change the agreement without losing years of work by rejecting it outright. Mr. Bush's policy change was welcomed by Saudi Arabia, one of the treaty's staunchest opponents.''This announcement by President Bush is the announcement of the death of the Kyoto Protocol,'' said Mohammed Al-Sabban, the energy adviser to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the leader of that country's negotiating team. Dr. Henry D. Jacoby, an expert on the treaty and an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said the treaty's outlines probably could not be salvaged. But the negotiating structure that led to it would probably continue, he said.''The Kyoto Protocol is really two different things -- it's the current text and numbers, and it's a process,'' he said. ''The numbers are no longer going to work, but the process is going to go on. It has to, because the issue is too important.''''It's clear,'' Dr. Jacoby added, ''that this administration won't be able to go four years without dealing with this.''The pact, if ratified, would commit the United States and three dozen other industrialized countries to cut their combined emissions of heat-trapping gases by 2012 to 95 percent of the amounts measured in 1990. Throughout last year, Mr. Bush had said he opposed the climate treaty because it would harm the economy and exempt developing countries from committing to reductions in emissions. But it was the definitive language in the letter, which represented the administration's first elaboration of its emerging climate policy, that startled many people, even some conservative Republicans who had long opposed the treaty. Several elements in the letter undermined the treaty. Some were seemingly intentional, like a pointed criticism of China and India. Other language, White House officials and others involved with the treaty said, remained in the letter even after meetings early in the week at which Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other foreign affairs experts suggested changes. Mr. Bush's reversal on power plants took away a valuable bargaining chip: evidence that the United States would commit to reduce emissions within its borders. Treaty experts said the shift would also seem to confirm suspicions of many European nations that the United States would avoid cutting emissions. In a separate passage, Mr. Bush alluded to what he called ''the incomplete state of scientific knowledge of the causes of, and solutions to, global climate change.'' Yet environmental groups and even some officials in the chemical industry, where many companies have already started to cut emissions, said the scientific consensus was stronger than ever.''We saw sufficient science emerging to warrant what in our judgment was prudent action back in 1991,'' said Thomas R. Jacob, the manager of international and industry affairs for DuPont, one of several dozen corporations that have committed to voluntary reductions in their greenhouse-gas emissions. Some longtime opponents of the climate treaty said they were surprised that the letter lacked the usual nuances and qualifications required to sustain diplomatic discussions, regardless of a country's stance on the substance of a treaty. Other critics of Kyoto welcomed the unambiguous statement. Dr. S. Fred Singer, a retired physicist and longtime critic of research indicating a warming trend with a human cause, said he hoped Mr. Bush would kill the treaty outright.''The Kyoto Protocol is like a vampire,'' Dr. Singer said. ''You need to drive a stake through its heart. Otherwise it'll keep coming back and causing problems.''The Bush letter has generated a number of cables from European governments to the State Department expressing concern for the fate of the climate talks. More telling, perhaps, was the reaction in China, where an official in the foreign ministry yesterday restated the stance of developing countries, that the United States and other industrialized countries must take the first steps to reduce emissions.''The developed countries have been discharging greenhouse gases for over a hundred years,'' the official said. ''They bear the historical responsibility on climate changes that cannot be shirked.''White House officials said that the letter reflected Mr. Bush's position on Kyoto, but did not preclude further talks. ''The president clearly expects his administration to be active internationally in dealing with the issue,'' said Sean McCormack, a White House spokesman.

INTERNATIONALA3-5Growing Ethnic Skirmishes Threaten War in Macedonia  Police troops in Tetovo, Macedonia's second-largest city, fired for hours at ethnic Albanians who belong to a group of insurgents trying to claim parts of Macedonia that are overwhelmingly Albanian. Fierce fighting is breaking out and the population is quickly dividing between Slavs and Albanians in Macedonia, which until now had escaped the ethnic carnage of Kosovo, to the north. A1Deadly Blasts in China  Explosions that appeared to be coordinated killed at least 18 people in Shijiazhuang, an industrial city 120 miles south of Beijing, sending riot police officers into the streets and setting off rumors that laid-off factory workers were seeking revenge. A3Plans for Taiwan Arms Sale  The Bush administration officially gave Congress details of a request by Taiwan for advanced weapons, a deal that China vigorously opposes. A3Bush Weighs Stance on Yen  The White House is said to be debating whether to allow a rapid and steep devaluation of the yen to ease the growing financial crisis in Tokyo. Such a move is strongly opposed by American automakers and other businesses that compete with Japan. A4Saudis Storm Hijacked Jet  The police in Medina forced their way into a Russian jet that officials said had been hijacked by two Chechen men. One hijacker was shot dead after he fatally stabbed a flight attendant, and another passenger was killed, officials said. A5World BriefingA5SPORTSD1-8More N.C.A.A. Upsets  No. 10-seeded Butler beat No. 7-seeded Wake Forest, 79-63, in the Midwest Region. No. 12-seeded Gonzaga beat No. 5-seeded Virginia, 86-85. D1Chinese Player to N.B.A.  Beijing has reportedly agreed to let Wang Zhizhi, a 7-foot-1 center drafted by the Dallas Mavericks in 1999, leave China to become the first Asian player in the N.B.A..D4NATIONALA6-9Bush May No Longer Seek Bar's Advice on Nominees  President Bush's legal advisers have told the American Bar Association that they want to end the group's nearly half-century role as a semiofficial screening panel for judicial nominees, lawyers involved in the discussions said. Many conservative Republicans have long complained that the bar association has displayed a liberal bias in evaluating prospective federal judges. A1Accelerated Tax Cut Urged  The Bush administration, faced with growing signs of a troubled economy, encouraged Congress to rework the president's tax cut proposal and put more money than previously contemplated back into the hands of individuals this year. But administration officials said they would continue to insist that the total cut not exceed $1.6 trillion over 10 years. A8Delay on New Forest Rules  The Bush administration essentially put off a decision on whether to defend a court challenge to Clinton administration rules putting a third of the national forests off limits to development. It also offered to postpone when the new rules would take effect, probably until at least early summer. The moves signaled that the administration might consider a settlement that could significantly scale back the effect of the rules. A7Warming Pact in Trouble  Efforts to complete the Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement intended to curtail global warming, have been seriously hurt by President Bush's reversal of a campaign promise to cut carbon dioxide emissions at power plants, negotiators and independent experts said. A7The E.P.A. administrator, Christie Whitman, said Mr. Bush's decision was driven by concern that capping emissions could cause the energy problems in California to spread. A7California Refunds Ordered  Federal regulators told electric-power suppliers to refund $55 million to state utilities unless they could justify prices that the regulators called excessive. A6Religion JournalA9NEW YORK/REGIONB1-5Jury Clears Combs Of Gun and Bribery Charges  A Manhattan jury acquitted the hip-hop mogul Sean Combs of all charges arising from a 1999 nightclub shooting that left three people injured. A second defendant, Anthony Jones, was also cleared, but a third, Jamal Barrow, 21, a young rap artist, was convicted of five of eight charges. A1If he could do it all over again, Mr. Combs would shed the bad-boy stuff, he said in an interview that was conducted before the verdict. B2Pay Figures in Torricelli Inquiry  Two former aides to Senator Robert J. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, have told a federal grand jury that his office paid government salaries for months to four aides who mainly worked on his 1996 campaign, lawyers and others said. B1Prosecutor Is Dismissed  The Brooklyn district attorney, Charles J. Hynes, fired Francis A. Mainiero, a senior prosecutor who is the subject of a federal investigation into accusations of bribe-taking. Officials said Mr. Mainiero had failed to report his being offered a bribe. B3EDUCATIONEnd of Ill-Fated Center Effort  Queens College returned $3 million of the $4.5 million donated by Dr. Bernard Salick, an alumnus who had given the money to seed what he and the college hoped would become a renowned AIDS research center. B1ARTS & IDEASB7-16Drawings Detoured by Lawsuit  Vatican concerns about a California lawsuit against its library led to the Metropolitan Museum of Art's losing an exhibition of Botticelli drawings to the Royal Academy in London. B7OBITUARIESC17Ann Sothern  The snappy actress and singer, whose career included Broadway, Hollywood and television, was 92. C17BUSINESS DAYC1-15Stocks Hold Downward Course  The Dow fell 207.87 points, or 2.1 percent, to 9,823.41; the Nasdaq dropped 49.80 points, or 2.6 percent, to 1,890.91; and the S.& P. 500 lost 23.03 points, or 2 percent, to 1,150.53, capping one of the worst weeks ever for stocks. Investors are looking for relief from the Fed, which is expected to cut interest rates on Tuesday. A1The Wall Street consensus is that the Fed will cut rates at least half a percentage point, though some experts wonder if that will lift the markets. C1Decision to Cut Oil Production  Analysts and cartel officials at the OPEC meeting in Vienna said production would be cut back by about one million barrels a day, or 4 percent, to buoy falling prices. C1Airline Deal Clears Hurdle  The Justice Department said it would not challenge American Airlines' bid to take over T.W.A., eliminating the last major hurdle to the proposed $742 million deal. T.W.A. filed for bankruptcy protection in January. C1U.S. Joins Suits Against HCA  The government joined eight whistle-blower lawsuits against the nation's largest hospital company that contend that the company schemed to defraud federal health programs. C1Business DigestC1EDITORIALA10-11Editorials: New York City's population peak; dealing with Mr. Putin; new weapons against tuberculosis. Columns: Frank Rich, Anthony Lewis. BridgeB13  TV ListingsB16  CrosswordB14  WeatherD8  Public LivesA6

President Bush met a barrage of criticism last week when he backed away from regulating carbon dioxide emissions, but he was only hastening the inevitable. A major shift in American policy on global warming had to come -- not chiefly because of the new administration's debts to campaign donors, but because of the sheer impracticality of the policy in place when George Bush took office. In the long run, Mr. Bush may actually have improved chances for slowing manmade changes in the world's climate. Until last week, global warming policy was synonymous with the Kyoto Protocol, which requires industrialized countries to control emissions of greenhouse gases according to strict targets and timetables. Environment ministers dominated the negotiations that led to the 1997 protocol, and they sought targets that were symbolically tough but hopelessly unrealistic. Caught in this fervor, the United States agreed in Kyoto to cut its emissions of greenhouse gases to 7 percent below 1990 levels, on average, from 2008 to 2012. Yet on the eve of the Kyoto negotiations America's emissions were already up nearly 10 percent from 1990 levels, and they have risen about 1.2 percent a year since then. Most of the facilities that will be burning fossil fuels from 2008 to 2012 are already in place today. For that reason alone, the Kyoto Protocol was never likely to be approved and implemented by Congress. Other industrialized countries, too, have recorded rising, not falling, emissions. Even as it became clear that most governments could not deliver on their Kyoto promises, powerful environmental groups and influential Green parties redoubled their support for the treaty rather than admit the need for adjustment. Under this pressure, every government in every industrialized nation has officially pretended the protocol was workable. Kyoto's unachievable targets have forced governments into bizarre diplomatic contortions. Some, especially in Europe, approached the Kyoto talks and subsequent negotiations in The Hague with no serious plan for how they would comply with the targets. Others, including the United States, Canada, Australia and Japan, are pushing for an international emissions trading system whose main effect would be to let them buy vast quantities of bogus emission credits from Russia and Ukraine. At Kyoto, Russia and Ukraine agreed to freeze their emissions at 1990 levels, but because of the collapse of the Soviet economy, they were already emitting greenhouse gases at 40 percent below those levels. So the emissions ''reductions'' they have available to sell are not real. By making it clear that the United States won't pretend to meet the Kyoto limits, the Bush administration has, for all intents and purposes, killed the Kyoto Protocol. Now it has a responsibility to build an alternative. America is ready for a sound policy. The Kyoto Protocol's demise is erasing unrealistic ambitions on the left, and a swelling majority of centrists now recognizes the need for precaution on burning carbon-based fuels. Conservative voices that oppose any control on carbon are fading as more Americans accept the scientific consensus on global warming. The administration and Congress could assemble a sensible package from legislation already in the works. We should sharply increase funding for research and development on affordable ways to move the economy entirely away from fossil fuels over the next several decades and raise efficiency of fossil-fuel burning in the interim. We should also create an incentive for companies to limit emissions by letting them trade carbon emission permits. Unlike the sulphur dioxide trading system created in 1990 to control acid rain, this one should let the government issue new permits, allowing more emissions, if prices for the credits ever rise above a certain level. That provision would reassure business that the cost of compliance would not skyrocket if cheaper carbon-saving technologies did not become available. This sort of program would embody the principle around which an effective global emissions reduction regime could also be built -- economic incentives that, over time, will slow the buildup of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere without the imposition of binding targets for a far-off future. The rest of the world is ready to pin the blame for the Kyoto Protocol's demise on the United States, though all nations that crafted the compact really share the blame. The sooner America takes the lead in devising effective new policies, the better it can lead the world beyond Kyoto. David G. Victor is senior fellow for science and technology at the Council on Foreign Relations and author of the forthcoming ''The Collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the Struggle to Slow Global Warming.''

To the Editor:As David G. Victor concedes (''Piety at Kyoto Didn't Cool the Planet,'' Op-Ed, March 23), the ''world is ready to pin the blame'' for the demise of the Kyoto climate accord on the United States. Unfortunately, his proposed solution would end up with the same result. Since we, citizens and businesses of the United States, produce the lion's share of greenhouse gas emissions, we can, if we so choose, refuse to accept the Kyoto accord and try to force our preferred ''solution'' on the rest of the world. Unless the United States can advance a solution that enjoys broad international support, it risks becoming an environmental pariah state. BEN LIEBERMAN  Maynard, Mass., March 23, 2001

With an international meeting of environment officials scheduled to begin on Thursday, the United States will be in the position of having no policy on global warming, which will be the main issue at the gathering. The Bush administration reconfirmed today that it opposed the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty to fight global warming, and would not submit it for Senate ratification.''The president has been unequivocal,'' the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said. ''He does not support the Kyoto treaty. It is not in the United States' economic best interest.''Mr. Fleischer, who was asked at a White House briefing to clarify the administration's stance, said the administration was developing other strategies to deal with change in the world's climate. The meeting of the Western Hemisphere's environment ministers will be the first such gathering since the Bush administration announced earlier this month that it would not seek to regulate power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide, a decision that amounted to effective abandonment of the Kyoto accord.''We're going into the lion's den unarmed,'' said a senior administration official who expressed deep frustration that a new policy had not yet been formulated. The American delegate to Thursday's meeting will be Christie Whitman, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, who had advised against the decision on power plant emissions but was overruled by the White House. At a news conference on Tuesday, Mrs. Whitman repeated the White House's position that it had ''no interest'' in carrying out the treaty negotiated in 1997 in Kyoto, Japan. Administration officials sympathetic to Ms. Whitman's position said she had tried in vain to obtain clear instructions about how to answer questions from United States allies concerned about the carbon dioxide policy. The administration's new stance reverses a campaign pledge made by President Bush and was at odds with the position that Ms. Whitman outlined to other environment ministers just four weeks ago at an international conference on global warming in Italy.''She's essentially not been given anything to say,'' one senior official said of the two-day meeting in Montreal, adding that the only thing Ms. Whitman would be able to state authoritatively about the administration's position on global warming was that it was the subject of a cabinet-level review. Several foreign leaders, including the German chancellor, Gerhard Schrder, have been outspoken in their criticism of the administration for its opposition to the Kyoto accord. Mr. Schrder is to meet with President Bush at the White House on Thursday, and global warming is expected to be high on their agenda. A senior official who defended the White House position said foreign governments should not be surprised either by Mr. Bush's opposition to the Kyoto accord, which he has criticized since early in the presidential campaign, or by the lack of a policy so early in a new administration.''Diplomatically, we're hearing a lot of criticism from a lot of countries, and I suppose at every meeting we go to we'll hear more,'' said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''At the same time, it's been no secret what the president's position on the treaty has been.''The murmurs of dissent within the administration reflected a view attributed to Ms. Whitman that the White House had been unwise to declare its opposition to the Kyoto pact before it could point to an alternative. In a memorandum to Mr. Bush earlier this month, before the decision on carbon dioxide emissions, Ms. Whitman warned that most other industrialized nations regarded the Kyoto accord as ''the only game in town.''''There's a real fear in the international community that if the U.S. is not willing to discuss the issue within the framework of Kyoto, the whole thing will fall apart,'' Ms. Whitman wrote in the memorandum, whose contents were first reported in The Washington Post.''Mr. President, this is a credibility issue (global warming) for the U.S. in the international community,'' she wrote. ''It is also an issue that is resonating here at home. We need to appear engaged and shift the discussion from the focus on the K-word to action, but we have to build some bonafides first.''The Kyoto accord would require the United States and other industrialized countries to reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases by an average of 5.2 percent by 2012 compared with  their 1990 levels. The United States and more than 100 other countries signed the treaty, but no industrial country has yet ratified it. An effort by the Clinton administration to win its ratification by the Senate was defeated 95 to 0. In the United States, most industry representatives have strongly opposed the accord, warning that it would impose enormous costs on the American economy. An official of the Global Climate Coalition, which reflects industry views, said today that the Bush administration had a right to sever any association with the Kyoto treaty's specific guidelines for emissions reductions.''There's a fundamentally more effective way of dealing with climate change, which is one based on technological development, and that's the one we support,'' the official, Glenn Kelly, said. But a former Clinton administration official, David B. Sandalow, who helped to negotiate the 1997 accord, said the stance would undercut American credibility.''It's a textbook case of unilateral diplomacy, which rarely works and always brings resentment,'' Mr. Sandalow said. An environmental group, Friends of the Earth, called the American stance ''environmental isolationism.''The meeting of environment ministers that begins in Montreal on Thursday will include representatives of Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and other countries from the Western Hemisphere in advance of a meeting of heads of state in May that will be known as the Summit of the Americas. In terms of global warming, a  more important gathering will take place in July, when heads of state have been invited to Bonn under the auspices of the United Nations Framework Convention on Global Warming, which President George Bush signed in 1992. That meeting had initially been scheduled for May, but was postponed at the request of the current administration. Correction:  March 31, 2001, Saturday  An article on Thursday about the international treaty on global warming referred incorrectly to a 1997 Senate vote of 95 to 0. The vote registered opposition to some provisions. It was not a rejection of the treaty, which has never been submitted for ratification. Correction: March 31, 2001, SaturdayAn article on Thursday about the international treaty on global warming referred incorrectly to a 1997 Senate vote of 95 to 0. The vote registered opposition to some provisions. It was not a rejection of the treaty, which has never been submitted for ratification.<br><br>

The European Union expressed dismay today at the latest confirmation by the Bush administration that it opposed a treaty to combat global climate change. On Tuesday, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Christie Whitman, said that because Congress was unlikely to ratify it, the Bush administration had no interest in carrying out the so-called Kyoto Protocol. The accord, reached in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997, would reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide by 5.2 percent by 2012 from 1990 levels. Today, the European Union's environment official, Margot  Wallstrom, said the Bush administration's continuing opposition to the treaty was worrying. While the 15-nation European Union is willing to discuss details of the treaty and problems, Ms. Wallstrom said, it is not willing to scrap the whole protocol. The White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, reconfirmed today that President Bush opposed the pact, in part because it did not bind developing nations to curb emissions. Ms. Wallstrom's comments came a day before Mr. Bush is to hold his first meeting in Washington with Chancellor Gerhard Schrder of Germany. Last week, Mr. Schrder reportedly sent a letter to Mr. Bush asking him to abide by the agreement.''We hope the Americans will change their mind, because we Europeans think we have the better arguments,'' a German government official said. Other European heads of state have voiced concern at the United States stance. Prime Minister Wim Kok of the Netherlands said at a European summit meeting in Stockholm last week that there was no point in the European Union striking a climate agreement only with Japan, Australia, Canada and other developed nations.''If others behave irresponsibly, we can try to show a sense of responsibility,'' Mr. Kok said,  ''but we need to focus on involving all those who started down the road to Kyoto.''And Chancellor Wolfgang Schssel of Austria told reporters, ''We need to insist that the United States fulfills its duty.''The United States is seen as the biggest single contributor to heat-trapping gases, contributing an estimated 25 percent of all such gases, though its population accounts for only about 4 percent of the world population. Talks on carrying out the Kyoto agreement broke down last November at a meeting of developed nations in The Hague. The talks are scheduled to resume on July 16 in Bonn. The treaty has been signed by more than 100 countries but has not yet been ratified by any industrial country. Earlier this month, President Bush reversed course and said he would not ask power plants to cut emissions of carbon dioxide, the gas that most scientists say is a major factor in rising average temperatures.

President Bush, in some of his most expansive statements on the Middle East since assuming office, said today that the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, should hear ''loud and clear'' that the United States wanted him ''to stop the violence.''Speaking at the second news conference of his presidency, Mr. Bush urged Israel to exercise restraint in its military actions but reserved his most pointed language for the Palestinian leader, stressing: ''The signal I'm sending to the Palestinians is stop the violence. And I can't make it any more clear. And I hope that Chairman Arafat hears it loud and clear.''After the escalation of Palestinian attacks against Israelis this week and Israel's bombardment of Palestinian bases, Mr. Bush, who had said he would be less involved in the Middle East than his predecessor, spent much of his news conference describing how his administration is dealing with the conflict. Mr. Bush said he had instructed Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to call Mr. Arafat to reiterate the message on halting the violence, so that the Palestinian would ''hear it again on the telephone today.''Administration officials said the strong words about Mr. Arafat and renewed frustration with him also stemmed in part from his demands for a vote Tuesday night on a Security Council resolution seeking a United Nations observer force in the Israeli occupied territories. The United States vetoed the move. Shortly after Mr. Bush's news conference, the senior State Department official dealing with the Middle East, Assistant Secretary of State Edward R. Walker Jr., told a Congressional hearing in blunt terms that Mr. Arafat had not called for an end to violence but rather for the ''continuation of the intifada.''Mr. Walker contrasted what he termed the efforts by the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, to allow the movement of goods and people between the Palestinian territories and Israel with the intransigence of Mr. Arafat.''We've seen absolutely no response from Arafat to our urgings to him to help bring the violence to a stop,'' Mr. Walker said. In another effort to persuade Mr. Arafat to restore calm, Mr. Bush said that he would be enlisting the support of the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, and King Abdullah of Jordan during their upcoming visits to the White House. They could try to persuade Mr. Arafat to ''speak out against violence in a language that the Palestinians can understand.''Mr. Bush ducked answering directly why he had not invited Mr. Arafat to the White House, saying he had ''quite a crowded calendar of leaders'' coming to see him. In contrast to President Clinton, who invited Mr. Arafat to the White House on more than a dozen occasions, the Bush administration has made clear that it has no intention of inviting Mr. Arafat any time soon. The emphasis on the Middle East came just before Mr. Bush held meetings at the White House with the German chancellor, Gerhard Schrder, at which the two leaders agreed to disagree on a treaty to combat global climate change but concurred on formation of a European rapid deployment force. In a lengthy communiqu entitled ''A Transatlantic Vision for the 21st Century,'' the two governments said, ''We openly note that we differ on the best way to protect the earth's climate.''Reiterating familiar positions, the statement said that the United States opposes the so-called Kyoto Protocol -- which would reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide by 5.2 percent by 2012 from 1990 levels -- because it would cause ''serious harm to the American economy'' and exempted many countries. In contrast, the communiqu said Germany believed that the targeted reductions were ''indispensable to combat global climate change effectively.''Despite the marked difference on such a major issue, the White House went out of its way to not only stress the confluences on other matters but to describe the unusually buoyant atmosphere surrounding the two leaders. ''This was not a hideously boring meeting,'' said a senior administration official who took part in the discussions. There were no set speeches or ''laborious reading from notes.''For his part, Mr. Bush told reporters that he was looking forward to sitting down with Mr. Schrder and telling him ''exactly where the United States is coming from.''In keeping with his administration's early emphasis on treating old allies well and reinforcing traditional alliances, Mr. Bush said the United States was a ''steadfast'' friend but ''a friend is somebody who's willing to tell the truth.''Mr. Bush said he told Mr. Schrder that his administration would consult with Germany on missile defense, an initiative that Germany says it has questions about. Germany did take the lead among European nations in telling Russia last month that the United States was serious about missile defense and that Europe could not be peeled away from the United States on the issue. During a brief give-and-take with reporters in the Oval Office, Mr. Schrder, with Mr. Bush beside him, posed some of his concerns about missile defense: ''The threat scenario that is behind the whole system; is it technologically feasible? Can we truly implement it? Who is going to be covered under the shelter? Who's going to be invited to be included by the shelter that we're going to build.''But Mr. Schrder then added that he was reassured by Mr. Bush's pledge to continue an open discussion on missile defense. According to the communiqu, the Bush administration said it welcomed the European Union's plan for a rapid reaction force, stressing it must be ''fully coordinated, compatible and transparent with NATO.''European officials were dismayed last month when Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said that the European force made him ''nervous'' because it might serve to undermine the purpose of NATO.On Russia, the communiqu referred to the ''important contribution'' Moscow could make in ''maintaining peace and stability in Europe,'' which contrasted with the tough language of late from the Bush administration. Mr. Bush confirmed today that his administration is reviewing aid programs to Russia intended to halt the spread of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons in order to make sure money ''is being spent in an effective way.''''And so we're putting a full review on the programs,'' he said. ''And we fully intend to continue to cooperate with the Russians. It's in our nation's best interests to dismantle -- work with Russia to dismantle -- its nuclear arsenal.''Even though he dwelled to a large extent on the Middle East, Mr. Bush reiterated that it was up to the Israelis and the Palestinians to make peace possible.''We will facilitate a peace settlement,'' he said. ''It requires two willing parties to come to the table to enact a peace treaty that will last. And this administration won't try to force peace on the parties.''Instead of focusing just on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Mr. Bush attempted to portray his administration as laying a ''broad foundation for peace.''''That means we've got to have good, strong relations with the Egyptians and the Jordanians and the Saudis,'' he said. Mr. Bush met at the White House earlier this month with Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the Saudi ambassador to the United States, who was a frequent visitor during the first Bush presidency but had a more distant relationship with the Clinton administration. The president also reminded reporters that General Powell had met with the new Syrian leader, Bashar al-Assad, in Damascus, another effort, Mr. Bush said, to build peace.

Yesterday was a timely moment for President Bush to meet with Germany's chancellor, Gerhard Schrder. Only a day earlier, the White House announced its ill-advised rejection of the Kyoto treaty on global warming, upsetting Germany and other European countries where climate change is a passionate political issue. Mr. Schrder urged Mr. Bush to cooperate with countries that want to work within the treaty at a conference to be held in Bonn later this year. Germany and many of its European Union partners have gained a new sense of confidence on the world stage, built on Europe's improving economy and its growing political and commercial integration. Mr. Schrder epitomizes this new independence. Europe may seem like familiar territory to Bush administration officials, many of whom dealt with the continent during the cold war years when European leaders were more deferential to Washington's wishes than they are now. Administration policy makers must adjust their thinking to Europe's new mood or risk conflicts over the environment, arms control, NATO and trade. The Kyoto treaty, which calls for sharp reductions in the emissions of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide by 2012, is a good example. While the treaty is imperfect, and the Senate has been opposed to ratification, the issue is far too important for Washington simply to walk off in a huff. The Bush administration should try to improve the treaty, not kill it. America is the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases. Mr. Bush should heed Mr. Schrder's pleas for faster emissions cuts. Europe is also concerned that the administration's missile defense plans could overturn arms control agreements and unnecessarily increase tensions with Russia. Germany, in particular, wants to prevent a return to a cold war atmosphere in Europe. With Washington's antimissile plans still evolving, it was possible to defer open disagreement this week. But the administration should respond to European concerns by engaging in active diplomacy with Russia, and China, on this issue in the months ahead. Europe's new assertiveness can help advance American policy goals, as demonstrated by this week's constructive mission to Macedonia by Europe's top foreign policy official, Javier Solana. But careful diplomatic coordination will be needed to keep trans-Atlantic relations on track.

Three weeks ago, Christie Whitman, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, returned from a meeting in Italy to report that she had had ''varied success in buying us time to fully engage'' in international negotiations on global warming. Today, at another international gathering, Mrs. Whitman seemed to have had less success still. With the White House having abandoned any pretense of support for the most far-reaching international treaty intended to tackle the problem, she heard mostly dismay and disappointment from counterparts who called the stand an enormous setback on an issue that should allow little room for patience.''Kyoto clearly is not perfect, but Kyoto is what we've got,'' a top Canadian negotiator on the issue, Paul Fauteux, said outside a meeting of environment ministers here. In criticizing the American opposition to the treaty, which was approved in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997, Mr. Fauteux said: ''We would rather work from what we've got than to call it quits. Climate change is a critically important problem, and it's too important to start from scratch.''For her part, Mrs. Whitman tried to put a forward-looking outlook on the American position. In private meetings, and in brief remarks to reporters, she said President Bush was ''absolutely committed to full engagement with the international community'' on global warming. But as for any alternative to Kyoto, which would require industrialized countries to reduce emissions of so-called greenhouse gases, Mrs. Whitman had little more to say than that the United States intended to propose ''other solutions.''For Mrs. Whitman, the former New Jersey governor, the day's appearance could not have been easy. In a confidential memorandum to President Bush after her trip to Italy, she had explicitly recommended that the administration avoid being seen as opposed to the Kyoto accord. And when that advice was overruled, administration officials sympathetic to her position said, she had asked in vain at the State Department and the White House for specific instructions about what more she might tell American friends and allies about what the new administration position might be. Citing ''other commitments,'' Mrs. Whitman left the two-day environment ministers' conference this afternoon, choosing not to remain for a news conference scheduled for Friday that is likely to lay bare even further the raw mood of other delegates, from 34 other countries in the Western hemisphere.''Her position has to be very uncomfortable,'' said one high-level delegate, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Mexico's environment minister, Victor Lichtinger, was among several delegates who said he had no doubt that the American abandonment of the Kyoto accord would greatly complicate efforts to find common ground on the issue.''I'm certainly disappointed,'' Mr. Lichtinger said this morning after a private meeting with Mrs. Whitman. ''Without the United States, it is difficult. It is a very important issue, and that's why we need to push, we need to react, we need to keep the United States in the process.''The meeting was part of preparations for a Summit of the Americas, an annual gathering of heads of state from around the Western Hemisphere, which is scheduled for next month, so global warming was not the only issue on the agenda. Delegates said discussions had been cordial, and a spokeswoman said Mrs. Whitman had been pleased with the open session and with one-on-one meetings with other delegates, who included representatives from Canada, Belize, Chile, Colombia, Chile and Panama, as well as from Mexico.''It all went very well,'' said the spokeswoman, Stephanie Bell. Still, the fact that the meeting followed so quickly after this week's reaffirmation of the American position seemed to have given an unusually tense air to what might otherwise have been an uneventful gathering. At a picture-taking session that was the only time the meeting was open to the news media, David Anderson, the Canadian environment minister, quickly cut off reporters' efforts to question Mrs. Whitman about the American position.''The agreement was that we would wait in our seats, we would talk with one another, and there would be an opportunity only for photographers to take pictures,'' Mr. Anderson said somewhat dryly. Mr. Anderson said before the session that he feared the American position would undermine the climate-change battle altogether. ''This is unraveling,'' he said, The Globe and Mail reported. ''We have to try our best to keep this together.''Today, the Canadian Government issued a statement reiterating that sense of urgency. ''Climate change is a critical global problem requiring global solutions,'' he said. ''The science behind climate change is increasingly compelling and the human impacts increasingly evident.''Of the 35 countries at today's session, only Canada and the United States would be obligated under the Kyoto accord to specific cuts in emissions of the gases believed to contribute to global warming. At least initially, developing countries like Mexico and Brazil would be exempt from such an obligation, a factor that Mr. Bush has identified as one of the treaty's major weaknesses. The Mexican delegate, Mr. Lichtinger, said that his country and others would ''make an effort'' to reduce their emissions, but that they believed the United States, Canada and Europe should take the lead. In her remarks to reporters, Mrs. Whitman did not say when she believed a Cabinet-level review of global warming policy that is under way in the administration might be completed. But she said Mr. Bush was ''confident'' that process would lead to a better approach than the one hammered out in Kyoto.''We can work together with our international friends and allies and neighbors and come up with market-based incentive solutions that can get us to the end of the day with this issue,'' she said.

We are learning something these days about the power of a willful president. Without a popular mandate, George W. Bush is making radical changes that will have long-term consequences for this country and the world. He is making them in a hurry, and for the moment there are no checks or balances to stop him. Day after day headlines tell us of fundamental policy reversals. Mr. Bush spurns the global effort, going back to the first Bush presidency, to reduce global warming. He calls off talks with North Korea about its missiles, casting doubt on the whole attempt to ease relations between South and North. He proposes to rethink U.S. aid programs that help dismantle former Soviet nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. A string of Bush administration decisions has halted steps to protect the environment. Arsenic in drinking water, roads in national forests and so on: limits are going to be ''restudied.''The reasons given for the environmental decisions have been almost insultingly unconvincing. Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said she was withdrawing the arsenic limit set in a Clinton administration regulation because it had not had ''thorough review'' in terms of ''sound science.'' In fact, the limit was proposed by highly regarded scientists after extended study. Mr. Bush, explaining to senators why he opposed the Kyoto protocol on global warming, spoke of the ''incomplete state of scientific knowledge of the causes of, and solutions to, global climate change.'' Of course the science is incomplete on global warming, as it is on most subjects. But virtually all scientific experts support the theory that greenhouse gas emissions contribute to warming. Contempt for public opinion as well as for science is evident in the environmental decisions. A striking example is what has happened to a Clinton regulation that prohibited road-building in about a third of the national forests. The head of the Forest Service, Michael P. Dombeck, resigned the other day and sent a letter to his boss, Ann M. Veneman, the secretary of agriculture. He respectfully urged her not to abandon the ban on roads.''Doing so,'' he wrote, ''would undermine the most extensive multi-year environmental analysis in history, a process that included over 600 public meetings and generated 1.6 million comments, the overwhelming majority of which supported protecting roadless areas.''Mr. Dombeck's plea is not likely to move the Bush administration. It postponed the effective date of the road-building regulation for 60 days for further review. And in the meantime its lawyers have not defended the regulation in a lawsuit brought against it by the Boise Cascade timber company and the state of Idaho. The American public would almost certainly vote to protect roadless parts of the national forests, as it would to reduce the amount of arsenic in water. But the public is not the audience that concerns Mr. Bush and his appointees. They are out to please the interests that supported and financed his campaign: timber companies, mining companies and the rest. Nor is Mr. Bush moved by the arguments of respected Republican elders. As he ordered a review of the program for dismantling Soviet weapons, former Senator Howard Baker -- whom he has named ambassador to Japan -- was telling the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the program should be funded in full. The Bush motto, a Washington quip has it, is ''Do it my way or no way.'' That catches the willful quality of these first months. But there is more to the story than that. This is the most radical administration in living American memory. I use the word deliberately. Today's right calls itself ''conservative,'' but it is not that. Conservatives want to conserve. That is why Teddy Roosevelt started the national parks and the conservation movement. George W. Bush and his people are driven by right-wing ideology to an extent not remotely touched by even the Reagan administration. And we haven't seen the half of it. As Mr. Dombeck said of opening the national forests to road-building, the decisions ''will have implications that will last many generations.''All this from a man who ran as a ''compassionate conservative,'' concealing his hard-edged ideology, and who could not get half the voters to vote for him even in that guise.

An international conference here ended in disagreement today after the United States declined to go along with a Latin American-backed call for industrialized countries to reduce their emissions of the heat-trapping gases blamed for global warming. The division was a further reflection of the gap that has emerged between the United States and leading allies over the issue since the Bush administration made clear its opposition to the Kyoto accord of 1997, the most far-reaching international treaty on the effort to address climate change. Senior delegates to the gathering, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said American representatives who tried to smooth over the disagreement had been unable to win approval of a compromise statement that would have stopped short of a call for  specific action. But most Latin American representatives issued a statement of their own calling for industrialized countries to ''engage in an effort to reduce their domestic emissions of greenhouse gases.''In a news conference at the end of the two-day gathering, a meeting of environment ministers from the Western Hemisphere, David Anderson, the Canadian environment minister, said that there had been general recognition of a need to reduce greenhouse gases but that ''there was not total consensus among ministers that we were able to reflect in the final communiqu.''The Kyoto Protocol, signed by the United States and 100 other countries but not yet ratified by any industrialized nation, would require industrialized countries to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases 5 percent to 7 percent below 1990 levels by 2012. The Bush administration, saying that such reductions would be too costly and that in any case developing countries should be bound by similar obligations, has made clear that it has no interest in carrying out the accord and will seek to develop alternative proposals. Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, had headed the American delegation here, but she left the conference on Thursday afternoon, leaving her seat to be filled by subordinates. Delegates said Canada had been among a handful of countries that indicated a willingness to go along with the compromise language proposed by the United States, even though senior Canadian officials had expressed deep disappointment with the American position. Canadian officials argued that the United States was not the only one to blame for the current discord. They noted that Europe's refusal to accept an American-backed proposal allowing the trading of emissions reductions had led to the breakdown of efforts at The Hague last November to forge an agreement that might have brought the Kyoto Protocol's ratification, and by extension to the Bush administration's decision to abandon any support for the treaty.''Europe adopted a position they knew would force the United States to pull out,'' said Mr. Anderson, the Canadian environment minister. ''This is going to be an ongoing struggle.''

President Bush and Christie Whitman, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, have now definitively abandoned any intention to regulate carbon dioxide from utilities and confirmed that they oppose the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty to fight global warming. Many the world over are speculating on the significance of these moves, some countries concluding they can relax their own efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, others despairing that the United States may not lead on the environmental issue of the era. Is there another way to address the problem of climate change while accommodating the Bush administration's concerns about the science and the costs of a climate policy? Is there a conservative response to global warming? I believe that a distinctive Bush policy on climate could involve three parts. First, the administration should ask the National Academies of Science and of Engineering to review the scientific evidence on climate change and the availability of energy-efficient technologies -- both issues on which the president has expressed concern. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has recently concluded that anthropogenic emissions have ''contributed substantially'' to warming. The National Academies could be asked to review the panel's findings, along with the state of technologies. In this way, President Bush could fulfill his campaign promise to follow the science on climate. Second, the administration should ask the private sector what it can achieve by way of energy efficiency. What is practical and cost-effective, and how quickly can it be done? It is little known, though quite astonishing, that 11 major companies, eight of them American, have committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by a total that exceeds the reductions required of Britain under Kyoto. United Technologies, I.B.M., Baxter, Polaroid and others have committed to improve energy efficiency, or to cut carbon dioxide, by at least 25 percent. And those who say these are only commitments should look at DuPont, the nation's largest chemical company, which has already reduced its greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent and promises to cut them by 65 percent by 2010. It has also pledged that 10 percent of its energy needs will be met by renewable sources by that time. After consulting carefully with companies, the administration should identify realistic goals for the major sectors of the economy. Auto executives, for example, have indicated that their industry cannot make the substantial changes called for by Kyoto in the next seven years but could achieve major improvements in 10 to 15 years. The president needs to get the automobile companies and other important industries to spell out what they can achieve and then commit to these goals. Finally, we must realize that very few countries are cutting emissions; most will not come close to equaling the reductions required of the United States by the Kyoto Protocol. Many nations would support the administration if it instead made a convincing commitment to abide by the 1992 international convention to combat global warming -- which President Bush's father signed -- while also agreeing to exceed the goals of Kyoto  over a longer period of time. Such commitments would permit a more orderly replacement of capital equipment and put to rest concerns that energy taxes are required or that electricity supplies would be disrupted. President Bush and many in the Senate have decried the Kyoto Protocol's failure to require cuts in greenhouse gases from developing countries. But the United States must have a cogent, credible policy before it can speak with authority to developing countries. China, second only to America in its emission of greenhouse gases, has actually reduced its carbon emissions over the past five years. The Chinese, in an effort to curb suffocating air pollution, have reduced coal subsidies, switched to cleaner transportation fuels and converted power plants to natural gas from coal. Helping the Chinese to make further progress could be another distinctive element of the Bush climate policy. In sum, there is another way: Review the state of science and technology, involve the private sector, set realistic goals and seriously engage developing countries. This is the path toward energy efficiency and progress on the environment. William K. Reilly, chairman of the World Wildlife Fund, was administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency in the first Bush administration.

THE steamroller has stalled. The Senate is about to pass a bill the president does not like, written by a senator he does not like: John McCain's campaign finance legislation. The president's tax bill has run into a Democratic counter-proposal and resistance to his own claim that tax cuts in future years would cure an economic slowdown this year. Congress may reject the president's plan to drill for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Reserve, he conceded Thursday. His faith-based charity initiative is encountering doubts from some churches. European nations are angry at the president's dismissal of the Kyoto treaty on global warming. Meanwhile, national polls, while showing approval of President Bush's job performance at nearly 60 percent, also showed public disapproval creeping up from the 20's to the 30's. None of this is fatal, of course. Presidents don't have to be invincible to succeed, and usually aren't. About this time eight years ago President Clinton's economic stimulus plan was being battered; a few months later his budget passed. Besides, Mr. Bush will probably get a tax bill enough to his liking to crow over. And if the president signs a campaign finance bill, it might be painful for him, but it will be popular. Further, his public standing is still pretty strong. In any case, few imagined the Bush juggernaut of the first weeks would last, not with a 50-50 Senate, which depends for its nominal Republican control on the longevity of 98-year-old Strom Thurmond. Still, Mr. Bush's new difficulties accompany a growing understanding that this is a very conservative administration. The dawning of that perception has its comic moments, as when abortion rights advocates, environmentalists, even labor, take turns in proclaiming, like Captain Renault in Casablanca, that they are ''shocked, shocked to find that there is conservatism going on in here.''It is true that Mr. Bush ran on a platform that was a litany of conservative principles, from school vouchers to protecting ''the life of the unborn.'' But he also insisted that he was a ''compassionate conservative,'' who would reach across the party aisle. On the stump, voters heard a great deal about moderation and bipartisanship, very little about red-meat conservative issues.  Again, when the Supreme Court effectively ended the election, Mr. Bush said in his Dec. 13 speech to the nation, ''Whether you voted for me or not, I will do my best to serve your interests, and I will work to earn your respect.''Coming from someone known for good manners and not for divisive name calling in the style of Newt Gingrich, that certainly sounded to many like a promise that he would work carefully to build consensus. But instead Mr. Bush's approach has been to avoid anything that might seem tentative, and to seize as his mandate not the popular vote but the oath of office. Those who had been lulled into the expectation of a centrist administration had, arguably, only themselves to blame, having ignored several clear indications of Mr. Bush's real thinking. First, there was his record in Texas, where labor, the environment and health care received little attention. Second, there was the fact that conservative political groups remained solidly behind him, whatever genial message he offered. And finally, those professing dismay today might have at least remembered their own campaign ads from last fall, which portrayed Mr. Bush as an enemy of the working family and the environment. IN fact, there was enough wish-fulfillment in the left's view of Mr. Bush that it's hard to disagree with Anne Coulter, a conservative writer, who said last month that Mr. Bush had shown ''how easy it is to hornswoggle liberals.''''All you have to do is go around calling yourself nice,'' she said. ''He just treats liberals like small children having nightmares. Darn if it didn't work.''Mr. Bush himself could have been making a similar point March 24 when he joked at the annual Gridiron dinner in Washington that Democratic power-broker Robert S. Strauss had told him ''You can fool some of the people all of the time, and those are the ones you have to concentrate on.''Now that the scales are falling from the eyes of the innocent, the obvious question is whether the growing view of Mr. Bush as very conservative will hurt him -- and if so, how much. Obviously his managers saw that image as a negative during the campaign; otherwise they would have embraced it. It is still a problem, since the American voter generally feels more comfortable with politicians near the middle of the road, not the shoulder. But how much it may hurt is likely to depend on the economy.''A level of strong conservatism in his policy preferences will not work substantially against him if we're in the middle of a substantially robust economy,'' said Norman J. Ornstein, a political scientist at the American Enterprise Institute. But if the slowdown continues ''then any flaw works against him.''Possibly the most dangerous of those flaws emerged in an ABC News/Washington Post Poll released last week: It found that 61 percent of the public thought Mr. Bush cared more about ''protecting the interests of large corporations'' than about those of ''ordinary working people.'' Only 31 percent thought he cared more about workers. Even without a deep recession, continued Republican control of Congress is uncertain. The House, where the 10-vote G.O.P. majority had held so far, is inherently unstable. And in the Senate, 20 Republican seats (including Mr. Thurmond's) are up for election in 2002, compared to only 13 for the Democrats. Republicans believe that having control of the White House, Senate and House for the first time in half a century will work in their favor. But, as one senior House Democratic aide said: ''They run the whole show. Just as we lived and died with Clinton for eight years, they live and die with Bush. If Bush is for anti-environmental things, then House Republicans are. The president becomes the face of your party.''Maybe. But one tactic that served him well with the Texas legislature is also at work in Washington. This administration is not pushing a lot of bills as its own. It's a kind of stealth politics. Anti-abortion forces, for example, want a bill that would apply federal murder statutes to fetuses. No one doubts that Mr. Bush would sign the bill, but it is up to the Congressional backers and the National Right to Life Committee to get it passed, and to take all the political heat. MANY of Mr. Bush's most criticized and most conservative actions have been taken by executive order. Indeed, of all his decisions, the most politically damaging may be the one to reverse a Clinton administration rule reducing the amount arsenic allowed in drinking water. This, far more than changing the rules about carbon dioxide in the air or ergonomic standards in the workplace, is something everyone can understand. Arsenic is a poison, and it's easy to make a campaign ad that serves, as Stan Greenberg, a Democratic pollster, put it, as ''an exclamation point for a cascade of decisions.''In the Senate, Mr. Bush has a different problem. There, he can either stand on principle and sometimes lose, or he can craft compromises, as he often, and adroitly, did with the Texas legislature. Thus far, the administration has sent mixed signals. On his education plan, the administration has already hinted that it won't insist on vouchers. On taxes, however, Mr. Bush he repeatedly said that $1.6 billion in cuts over 10 years is ''just right.''Even if Mr. Bush reveals himself to be a political realist, happy to take a half-loaf over the next three years, it is unlikely this White House will face widespread disaffection from true believers on the right. David Keene, head of the American Conservative Union, said the once-impatient conservative movement had matured. The style and genuine conservatism of this administration may have spurred that change. In the administration of President Bush's father, Mr. Keene said, ''Conservatives were treated as if they were in the stands,'' like home team fans expected to cheer. Now he said, through appointments and consultations, ''Conservatives are part of the team. If you're part of the team you tolerate mistakes or failures more than you do as a fan.''Correction:  April 8, 2001, Sunday  An article last Sunday about political opposition to the Bush administration misspelled the first name of one of the president's supporters, a conservative writer. She is Ann Coulter, not Anne. Correction: April 8, 2001, SundayAn article last Sunday about political opposition to the Bush administration misspelled the first name of one of the president's supporters, a conservative writer. She is Ann Coulter, not Anne.<br><br>

European leaders frequently bristle about American behavior, but President Bush's abrupt decision this week to abandon a treaty on global warming has provoked even more than the usual level of anger and frustration.''Irresponsible,'' ''arrogant,'' even ''sabotage'' are just a few of the charges that Europeans have leveled at Mr. Bush since he announced his refusal to follow through on the treaty, the Kyoto Protocol. And European Union representatives will take their case in favor of the accord to Washington on Monday, though their arguments are not expected to prevail. The response is so intense in part because the decision has aggravated a mixture of grudges that have gnawed at Europeans for years. They are angry that the United States appears oblivious to widespread environmental concerns across most of Europe. They are frustrated that the United States, by virtue of its size, can undermine a treaty that was negotiated by more than 100 countries. Most of all, they are depressed that there is not much they can do about it. The United States produces about 25 percent of the gases associated with global warming, and its refusal to meet goals set by Kyoto to reduce those emissions makes it difficult for competitors to stick with their goals.''To suggest scrapping Kyoto and making a new agreement with more countries involved simply reflects a lack of understanding of political realities,'' said Margot Wallstrm, Europe's commissioner for environmental affairs. ''We could lose years of work if we were to start from scratch.''Ms. Wallstrm will lead the delegation that meets on Monday with Christie Whitman, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency. The group is also expected to include Environment Minister Kjell Larsson of Sweden, whose country currently holds the rotating European Union presidency, and representatives of Belgium, which takes over from the Swedes in July. The meeting is part of a diplomatic push that is also supposed to include visits to China, Russia, Iran and Japan to assess whether it would be possible to carry through on the Kyoto treaty without the United States. Today, environment ministers from European Union countries discussed the Bush decision at a previously scheduled meeting in Sweden, where the reaction was one of indignation.''Kyoto is still alive,'' said Mr. Larsson, who was host of the meeting in Kiruna, 60 miles north of the Arctic Circle. ''No country has the right to declare Kyoto dead.''The anger at the United States is spread evenly across Europe. Dominique Voynet, France's minister for the environment, called Mr. Bush's decision ''completely provocative and irresponsible'' and warned the United States against ''continuing the work of sabotage'' if other countries decided to embrace the goals of the Kyoto agreement on their own. Le Monde, the French daily newspaper, called Mr. Bush's decision ''a brutal form of unilateralism.'' In London, The Independent reported that ''history will not judge George Bush kindly.''When Mr. Bush met with the German Chancellor, Gerhard Schrder, in Washington on Thursday, Kyoto formed a central disagreement. ''We will not do anything that harms our economy, because first things first are the people who live in America,'' Mr. Bush said. This kind of America-first sentiment prompted sharp criticism from the European Union Commission president, Romano Prodi. ''If one wants to be a world leader, one must know how to look after the entire earth and not only American industry,'' the former Italian prime minister told La Repubblica newspaper. But nobody has any illusions about changing American policy, and the real question European leaders are asking is whether they can or should press ahead without America.''It is a catastrophe,'' said Gerd Billen, executive director of Germany's biggest environmental group, Naturschutzbund Deutschland, which has 350,000 members. ''Everybody knows how hard it is to reach an international agreement on environmental issues like this, and this could destroy it.''Mr. Billen and other environmental leaders are pushing for a boycott against American companies, particularly oil companies that have extensive gas-station networks in Europe.''It would be a citizens' action, and if it is done right, it could really put pressure on the oil companies,'' said Alexander de Roo, deputy chairman of the European Parliament's environmental committee. ''I don't think that begging will be very effective. I think they will only listen to powerful arguments.''As in many other international issues, from the decision to send peacekeeping forces to the Balkans to coordinating international currency rates, Europeans know from experience that it is difficult to accomplish anything without American collaboration. Under the Kyoto Protocol, which was approved in 1997 after years of negotiation, 37 other industrial countries agreed to reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases by 2012 to 5.2 percent below the levels in 1990. But the United States is by far the biggest producer of greenhouse gases, both per capita and in total. The average American consumes twice as much energy as the average European, and the emission of greenhouse gases is also about twice as high per capita in the United States as in Europe. If European countries press ahead with their own goal, European companies run the risk of incurring higher expenses while American companies benefit from easier rules. Ms. Wallstrm, the environmental commissioner, noted at a news conference in Brussels on Thursday that Europe did not want to end up rewarding the United States for its refusal to go along. But abandoning the goals is politically treacherous, because they enjoy strong popular support in most countries. Despite the anger that many Europeans feel toward high gasoline taxes, support for environmental regulations remains much stronger than in the United States. In the months leading up the Kyoto meetings in 1997, the European Union proposed a remarkably ambitious goal of reducing greenhouse emissions to 15 percent below the levels of 1990. Reflecting the enormous difference in the political and social climates in the United States and Europe, European business groups merely tried to moderate those goals and many industrial associations committed themselves to steep reductions in emissions as a way to escape direct government regulation. Many European environmental leaders argue that Europe needs to press ahead.''If 55 countries representing 55 percent of worldwide CO2  emissions ratify the Kyoto protocol, then it begins to function,'' Mr. de Roo said. On a broader level, many Europeans are convinced that Mr. Bush is leading the United States into greater isolation. Many commentators seized upon Mr. Bush's comment last week that he would not do anything to weaken the American economy. The announcement was front-page news across Europe, and it quickly prompted a storm of criticism.''We are back to Ronald Reagan and America First,'' said Noel Mamer, a leader of the French Green party and a member of Parliament. ''I think the decision is completely mad, and it is a reason for more isolation for America.''But even some of the fiercest European critics admit that they have little leverage. In Brussels, European leaders carefully avoided making any threats and said they merely planned to ''explain'' their position to the Bush administration.''The United States will probably come out of this crisis of trans-Atlantic relations as the winner,'' said Libration, the left-leaning French newspaper. But, it added, ''Those who spew gases run the risk of reaping, long before the climate has heated up, an explosive hostility in public opinion and diplomatic isolation.''Correction:  April 2, 2001, Monday  An article yesterday about European reaction to the Bush administration's stance on the Kyoto treaty to combat global warming misspelled the surname of a French member of Parliament who called the policy ''completely mad.'' He is Nol Mamre, not Mamer. Correction: April 2, 2001, MondayAn article yesterday about European reaction to the Bush administration's stance on the Kyoto treaty to combat global warming misspelled the surname of a French member of Parliament who called the policy ''completely mad.'' He is Nol Mamre, not Mamer.

INTERNATIONAL3-13Milosevic Surrenders, Ending Standoff in Serbia  The former Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic, surrendered to Serbian authorities early today and was brought to Belgrade's Central Prison, the Serbian Interior Ministry said. Negotiations with Mr. Milosevic had continued all night, both with government officials and senior members of his own Socialist Party, said the party leader, Branislav Ivkovic.1The Serbian government's attempts yesterday to arrest Mr. Milosevic fell apart when his personal guards fought back with unexpected force, government ministers said.8Report Backs Taiwan Request  A confidential review by United States naval officers has concluded that Taiwan needs a significant infusion of new weapons, including a radar system that China says it does not want Taiwan to have.1Kyoto Retreat Angers Europe  President Bush's abrupt decision to abandon the Kyoto Protocol treaty on global warming has provoked even more than the usual level of anger and frustration throughout Europe.3Warning on AIDS Drugs  Unless public health systems are strengthened in poor countries, the benefits of more AIDS drugs at lower prices could be undone by ineffective distribution or misuse, leading to the development of new strains of drug-resistant viruses, American foundations and African experts say.10Opponent Arrested in Ukraine  Ukrainian prosecutors said they had arrested Yulia Tymoshenko, an outspoken political opponent of President Leonid Kuchma, in a hospital ward where she was recovering from six weeks in detention.(Reuters) NATIONAL14-26Many Are Mired in Debt And Seeking a Path Out  Many of the 1.2 million Americans who go bankrupt each year have only hard luck to blame, critics of credit card and automobile companies say. The industry, promoting a tougher bankruptcy law that President Bush is likely to sign, has tried to depict a culture of spendthrift deadbeats.1Imprisoned and Dying  Longer sentences, tough policies that keep criminals behind bars even when they are physically no longer a threat, and a quadrupling of the nation's prison population have led to an increase in the number of dying prisoners.1The Larry Potters of the World  A growing parade of aggrieved writers and artists have helped turn intellectual property litigation into a burgeoning cottage industry.1Hawaiians Oppose Army Range  An Army plan to resume live-fire training in a Hawaii valley has met fierce resistance from residents who say it threatens a cultural, historic and environmental legacy.14Hats Off to Hillbillies  In Pikeville, Ky., ''hillbilly'' is no longer a dirty word, and they are having a festival to prove it.14Election Outlook Shifts for Davis  California's energy crisis has shifted talk from Gov. Gray Davis's presidential candidacy chances in 2004 to his prospects for re-election next year.16A Painting by Numbers  The portrait of America emerging from the 2000 census is of a more ethnically and racially diverse country, with fast-growing suburbs filling with new immigrants and a continuing migration from the Frost Belt to the Sun Belt.20NEW YORK/REGION27-32The Very Rich Cut Corners During Economic Slowdown  The rich and powerful have so far had to make only small concessions in their standard of living during the economic downturn. While many have lost money in the stock market in recent months, those losses are coming out of the enormous gains they piled up in the last decade.1City May Lose House Seats  Despite strong population gains, New York City faces an intense fight to keep its seats in the House of Representatives as political mapmakers in Albany wrangle over new Congressional boundaries.27Errors in the Operating Room  When a doctor operates on the wrong part of a patient's body, the one with the scalpel is usually the last in a line of hospital workers who have contributed to the mistake. There were 28 such cases in New York State last year, up from 20 in 1999.27OBITUARIES25Eleanor Clymer  The children's book writer, who published 58 books between 1943 and 1983, was 95. Mrs. Clymer originally wanted to be a science writer, and several of her books sought to teach children about subjects like archaeology.25James Ailinger  A professional football player when the forward pass was still a novelty, he was 99.25Chess32  Weather33  Cong. Vote32

Even as a presidential candidate, George W. Bush made no secret of his disregard for the 1997 Kyoto treaty on climate change. But when Mr. Bush made it clear that his administration would abandon the accord, the response from much of the rest of the world -- whose environment ministers met in Montreal -- was stunned disappointment. The Europeans, Japan and Canada fear that if the treaty is cast aside, it may take years to come up with another approach to what they see as an urgent problem. Douglas Jehl

An article yesterday about European reaction to the Bush administration's stance on the Kyoto treaty to combat global warming misspelled the surname of a French member of Parliament who called the policy ''completely mad.'' He is Nol Mamre, not Mamer.

To the Editor:Re ''Bush Angers Europe by Eroding Pact on Warming'' (news article, April 1):Many of us Americans feel the same emotions that you ascribe to European leaders regarding President Bush's abandoning the Kyoto treaty on global warming (that is, frustration and depression) plus one: embarrassment. ROBERT LEBOW  Southbridge, Mass., April 1, 2001

These are not easy days for the greener wing of the Republican Party. A series of environmental reversals by the Bush administration has highlighted an old fault line in the party that is both geographic and ideological and shaken many of the party's Northeastern moderates. Representative Christopher Shays, Republican of Connecticut, says his college-student daughter, ''a true-blue Republican,'' is wondering ''what the heck is happening with our party when it comes to the environment.''Representative Marge Roukema, Republican of New Jersey, fired off a letter after the Bush administration reversed itself on regulating carbon dioxide emissions from power plants: ''Mr. President, health and safety first! We urge you in the strongest possible terms to reconsider your decision.''And Senator Lincoln Chafee, Republican of Rhode Island, when asked about the reaction back home, said, ''There's a realization that some of the Western senators and more conservative elements of the party are calling some important shots,'' adding that the carbon dioxide issue was ''an important one.''In fact, environmental issues often pit moderates against conservatives, Northeast against South and West in the Republican Party. The moderates, many from suburban districts that voted for Vice President Al Gore last year, are careful to praise President Bush's performance over all -- but are just as careful to note their disagreements on the environment.  And these tensions are widely expected to increase as the administration moves on energy policy. Democrats, scenting blood, have been scathing on the administration's recent environmental decisions to oppose the Kyoto treaty on global warming, to reverse the campaign position on carbon dioxide emissions and to reconsider Clinton administration standards on arsenic in drinking water. And environmental groups are warning that Mr. Bush's policies could cost his party dearly in next year's elections. Ted Roosevelt, a Republican who is chairman of the League of Conservation Voters and was a Bush delegate at last year's party convention -- although his organization endorsed Mr. Gore -- described himself as ''obviously disappointed.''Mr. Roosevelt, whose great-grandfather President Theodore Roosevelt helped found the modern conservation movement, added of Mr. Bush: ''The environment is such a key issue, and he's got such a very small margin in Congress. If the administration is consistently anti-environment, I can almost guarantee that he will lose a majority in both the House and the Senate.''Carl Pope, executive director of the Sierra Club, said the Bush decisions put moderate Republicans in a difficult place, with a choice of breaking with the administration or alienating their constituents. It is not an unfamiliar place to them. Representative Sherwood Boehlert, the Republican from central New York who heads the House Committee on Science, often fought his party on environmental issues in the antiregulatory heyday of the Congress led by Newt Gingrich.''We don't get paid for the easy ones,'' Mr. Boehlert said philosophically. He is one of the highest-rated House members in the League of Conservation Voters' Republican honor roll, a list dominated by Northeasterners, who, Mr. Boehlert noted, have ample experience with the perils of pollution. Mr. Boehlert said he was ''profoundly disappointed'' by Mr. Bush's position on carbon dioxide emissions, and would continue to push for legislation that would regulate those emissions as part of a ''four-pollutant strategy.'' But he also said he remained hopeful about the Bush administration's environmental direction, noting that it was still early and that Mr. Bush had yet to assemble his science team.''When that happens, he will get some advice he is not now getting,'' Mr. Boehlert said. William K. Reilly, who was administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency for Mr. Bush's father, President George Bush, also noted that Mr. Bush's decision on carbon dioxide had come ''awfully early.''''One really has to hope -- and I really do believe -- it's not the last word,'' Mr. Reilly said. Indeed, many Republican moderates were delighted by the appointment, early on, of one of their own to the top job at the Environmental Protection Agency, former Gov. Christie Whitman of New Jersey.''That sent a strong signal to me that this administration is committed to improving our environment,'' said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, who said she remained hopeful. But Mrs. Whitman has been the target of fierce criticism on the right, and Mr. Bush's decision on carbon dioxide was widely seen as undercutting her at a critically early time. Mrs. Whitman did not respond to a request for comment. As for the White House, a spokesman said, ''The president has taken any number of bold steps to safeguard our environment.''Asked about the environmental divisions in the Republican Party, Mr. Reilly said: ''The antiregulatory wing of the Republican Party always gets stronger when it does not occupy the White House. Once in charge of the regulatory process, once on the line for pollution events or failures of environmental protection, Republican presidents become more environmentally sensitive, and Republicans generally become more environmentally supportive.''If nothing else, some analysts suggest, politics will push the administration greenward. And indeed, some environmentally friendly moves are expected from the White House before Earth Day on April 22. Charles Cook, who publishes an independent political newsletter, said that given the extraordinary closeness of the 2000 elections, ''this whole suburban thing is key.''''They got killed in the non-Southern suburbs,'' Mr. Cook said of the Republicans, ''and it's a collection of social, cultural and environmental things -- guns, abortion and certainly the environment.''''They need to do a couple really green things really soon,'' he added.  ''House Republicans back in '95 and '96 saw what happens if you are perceived as anti-environment. That really hurt them in '96.''Senator Robert C. Smith, the New Hampshire Republican who is chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee, is cited by advocates on both sides as a man who recognized the power of the environment in his region. Mr. Smith, who is up for re-election in 2002, is described by Mr. Pope of the Sierra Club as ''a profoundly conservative senator who knows how to listen to his constituents.''Others argue that the calculus is different now that the country is in an economic funk and worried about energy, and Mr. Bush seems a leading proponent of that view. A New York Times/CBS News Poll in early March suggested that this argument carried the most weight with Republicans. Asked which was most important, producing energy or protecting the environment, 44 percent said energy, 47 percent said the environment. But 64 percent of the independents polled said the environment should take precedence, as did 71 percent of the Democrats. Grover Norquist, a conservative strategist, said Republicans needed to talk about the environment in their own terms.''Just as you can be for poor people without signing on to some left-wing redistributionist scheme,'' Mr. Norquist said, ''you can be for the environment without being for some extreme regulatory scheme.''As this struggle plays out, Mr. Boehlert said he expected the party's moderates to play a critical role.''The balance is so close in the House, the moderates can tip it one way or the other,'' he said. (Although even among themselves, moderates can disagree on policy specifics, like the wisdom of the Kyoto treaty.)For example, the administration's proposal to drill for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, part of its energy policy, is dismissed out of hand by some moderates.''The votes aren't there for drilling in A.N.W.R.,'' said Representative Constance A. Morella, Republican of Maryland, who was among the Republicans who successfully urged committee leaders to omit Arctic drilling from the budget resolution. Representative James C. Greenwood, a Republican whose suburban Philadelphia district voted for Mr. Gore last year, argued: ''We have to look for a position that may not be where the president is, and probably won't be where the Sierra Club is. But we moderate Republicans have to find a middle ground that's environmentally sensible.''

The Bush administration turned down a European request today that it reconsider a decision seen as likely to doom the international treaty on global warming known as the Kyoto accord. In meetings with European Union emissaries, who had been dispatched to Washington on an emergency mission, administration officials restated a view that the 1997 treaty was ''unfair to the United States'' and that it was not worthy of American support. The European Union has been a vocal supporter of the accord, and it was among the foreign voices that reacted harshly to President Bush's decision last week to abandon the treaty, which was signed by the United States and 100 other countries. After a meeting with Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the head of the European delegation said he had heard no indication that the administration might change its mind.''We are going to continue the Kyoto process; we have the same objectives as before,'' said the delegation chief, Kjell Larsson, who is Sweden's environment minister. ''There are very small chances, if any, of United States participation.''The treaty has been ratified by only one country, Romania, and while it could technically be put into effect without American support, United States and foreign officials have described that scenario as highly unlikely. With another international meeting on global warming scheduled for later this month, in New York, the new American stance leaves unresolved even the most basic questions about how the Bush administration might now propose to tackle the problem. In a statement, Ms. Whitman said little more than that she was ''optimistic'' that through ''international processes we can develop technologies, market-based incentives, and other innovative approaches to global climate change.'' She delivered much the same message to a conference of environment ministers from the Western Hemisphere in Montreal last week. The White House has said the global warming policy is the subject of a cabinet-level review. But in a sign that the issue remains in flux, administration officials said today that no decisions had been made as to whether Ms. Whitman or some lower-level official would represent the United States at the New York meeting and at one in Bonn in July.''They do not have any concrete alternatives or options for the moment,'' Margot Wallstrom, the European Union's environment commissioner, said after today's meetings. With Japan, Russia, Germany, Britain, Canada, Australia and France all explicit in their criticism of the new American position, Ms. Wallstrom said, the issue was becoming a foreign-policy problem for the United States.''It is becoming clear to the Bush administration that this is about international relations as well, and other countries are reacting very strongly against the U.S.,'' she said. The Kyoto treaty, the most far-reaching international agreement on global warming, would require the United States and other industrialized countries to reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases by 5 percent to 7 percent below 1990 levels by 2012. The White House has objected in particular to the fact that, under the treaty, developing countries would not be subject to any immediate restriction. In ruling out a plan to impose restrictions on power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide, one of the gases that would be regulated under the accord, it said such a step would be too costly to the economy and to American consumers. The 16-member delegation also met today with Richard Armitage, the deputy secretary of state, and Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, who as a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee has been critical of the administration's decision to abandon hope for the Kyoto accord. Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, a research and advocacy group in Washington, said today that it was important that the administration move swiftly in formulating a new policy.''They know what they don't want, which is Kyoto,'' Ms. Claussen said. ''I don't think they're very far along in deciding what they do want.''

INTERNATIONALA3-11China Demands Apology For Planes' Collision  Beijing blamed the United States for the midair collision of a spy plane and a Chinese fighter, and it suggested that the release of the 24-member American crew hinged on Washington's willingness to apologize. President Bush called for the crew's immediate return, though he set no deadline. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said he saw no reason for an American apology. A1If the collision occurred where the Pentagon has indicated, the Bush administration has strong legal standing in demanding that both the plane and its crew be released promptly, several legal experts said. But in the more practical realm, they said, the American position could be damaged by some of the Pentagon's own actions in the cold war and after. A1Two American officials met with crew members and said their condition appeared to be good. A10Palestinian's Bleak Prognosis  Mohammed Dahlan, the Gaza security chief, said Palestinians, with little hope for a full peace settlement, were prepared for a long period of sacrifice. A mortar round wounded an Israeli baby in Gaza, and the Israelis retaliated by shelling. A8Milosevic Admission on Bosnia  Bosnia's Foreign Ministry said an admission by the jailed former president of Yugoslavia, Slobodan Milosevic, that he channeled state funds to Serbian forces in Croatia and Bosnia in the 1990's should remove any doubt that Yugoslavia had a role in atrocities committed in those wars. A8Putin as Friend to Business  President Vladimir V. Putin promised a governmentwide shake-up intended to make business work in Russia, reverse capital flight and sustain new economic growth. A3Battle over Russian TV Station  Foes of the media baron Vladimir A. Gusinsky, who has been a frequent critic of President Vladimir V. Putin, staged a renegade stockholder's meeting at which they appeared to take control of the nationwide NTV television network, the only one not under effective state control. A3World BriefingA8NATIONALA12-18Cheney Plays Tiebreaker On a Bush Tax Cut Vote  Vice President Dick Cheney cast his first tie-breaking vote, enabling President Bush's tax plan to pass its first Senate test, 51 to 50. The vote blocked a Democratic effort to pare back the $1.6 trillion tax cut to pay for drug coverage under Medicare. A1Shift in Health Priorities  President Bush's budget will propose deep cuts in various health programs for people without health insurance, administration officials said. The programs, championed by President Bill Clinton, would be reduced to $20 million from the current level of $140 million; the programs received $40 million in the previous fiscal year. Over all, officials said, the Health and Human Services budget will rise by 5 percent, to $55.5 billion. But all of the net increase goes to the National Institutes of Health, for biomedical research not patient care. A1No Change on Climate Treaty  The Bush administration rejected a European request to reconsider its decision to abandon the Kyoto Protocol on global warming. A16Strategy for Campaign Bill  House supporters of the Senate's newly passed McCain-Feingold campaign finance overhaul began a drive to bring the bill to a House vote before Memorial Day and promised to remind freshman Republicans whose last campaigns were aided by Senator John McCain of their commitment to changing the system. A18Recount Review Favors Bush  A newspaperanalysis by The Miami Herald suggested that President Bush would have carried the state of Florida and won the presidency without Supreme Court intervention had a recount ordered by a state court been allowed to proceed. A18Diversity, and Segregation  The United States is more racially and ethnically diverse than ever, but an analysis of new census data suggests that people still live in largely segregated neighborhoods. A15A Drug Task Force Under Fire  A state prosecutor has dismissed charges against 17 residents of Hearne, in Central Texas, who were arrested by a drug task force accused of focusing on blacks. The prosecutor said a crucial informer had failed polygraph tests. A14NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8Modern Demands Putting Modernist Terminal at Risk  The Port Authority has approval from state officials to demolish a large piece of T.W.A.'s distinctive terminal, which is designated a city landmark, as part of a $10 billion redevelopment of Kennedy Airport. B1Airline Passenger Cleared  A jury in Newark acquitted John C. Davis Jr. of assault in connection with his fight with an airline ticket agent, whose neck was broken. B1SPORTSD1-8Mets Beat Braves in Opener  The Mets beat Atlanta, 6-4, on a 10th-inning homer by Robin Ventura. D1Admission From Strawberry  Darryl Strawberry's probation officer said the ex-slugger had admitted to a weekend cocaine-smoking spree. Strawberry remained hospitalized in Tampa, Fla., as prosecutors sought to have him sent to prison. D3OBITUARIESA19ARTSE1-10A Tiff at the Met  Trouble is brewing between members of the grand old Metropolitan Opera Club and the Met over fees and exclusivity of the clubhouse, tucked away on the fourth floor. E1Panel on Decency in Art  Mayor Giuliani appointed 15 men and 5 women to a panel that is to recommend decency standards for art in New York City museums. B3EDCATIONB7Opening Up M.I.T., Online  The university is to announce today that it will post nearly all course materials on the Web, even video lectures, available free to anyone. A1Suspending Unruly Students  Chancellor Harold O. Levy will propose regulations today giving teachers the power to remove disruptive students from their classrooms for up to four days. B1BUSINESS DAYC1-18Technology Pulls Down Markets  Investors dumped shares of software companies and telecommunications concerns, driving the Nasdaq down 6.17 percent, or 109.97 points, to 1,673.00; the index is now down 32.3 percent in 2001. The Dow fell 292.22 points, or 3 percent, to 9,485.71, and the S.& P. 500 lost 3.4 percent. C1Discounts Propel Auto Sales  Automakers sold family vehicles at a seasonally adjusted annual pace of 17.1 million vehicles in March; 16 million is regarded as strong. Extensions of rebates and other discounts helped sustain the buying. C1Effort to Play Deal Breaker  Maurice R. Greenberg, chief executive of American International Group, offered $23 billion in stock for American General, a move intended to break up a three-week-old deal by Britain's second-largest insurer to take over American General. C1Inquiry of Drink Maker Sought  The Council of Better Business Bureaus wants the F.D.A. to investigate whether Hornell Brewing used false advertising for an herbal drink. C8Business DigestC1World BusinessW1DININGF1-14EDITORIALA20-21Editorials: Mr. McCain's journey; revisiting execution of the retarded; decency impaneled. Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd. CrosswordE7  TV ListingsE9  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8

It was almost exactly a year ago, during a campaign appearance in Pennsylvania, that George W. Bush said: ''Every environmental issue confronts us with a duty to be good stewards. As we use nature's gifts, we must do so wisely. Prosperity will mean little if we leave future generations a world of polluted air, toxic lakes and rivers, and vanished forests.''He said it with a straight face. He must have known, even as he spoke, that his home state of Texas was an environmental disaster zone. The Sierra Club summed the matter up as follows: ''Texas ranks first in toxic releases to the environment, first in total toxic air emissions from industrial facilities, first in toxic chemical accidents, and first in cancer-causing pollution.''Tom (Smitty) Smith, director of the public interest group Texas Public Citizen, said in a reference to Mr. Bush's tenure as governor, ''Every chance that Bush has had, he's stood up for the polluters.''So we probably shouldn't have been surprised three weeks ago when President Bush reneged on his campaign pledge to seek reductions in carbon dioxide emissions, a policy decision that deeply embarrassed his own environmental protection administrator, Christie Whitman. Nor was there reason to be surprised when he turned his back on the Kyoto accord, the international treaty on global warming. Or when he withdrew new regulations requiring a substantial reduction in the permissible levels of arsenic in drinking water. Even some Republicans are reacting with dismay. Christopher Shays, a G.O.P. congressman from Connecticut, said his daughter, a college student, wanted to know ''what the heck is happening with our party when it comes to the environment.''But it's not just the environment. A couple of weeks ago we learned that the president would seek to cut funding for day care for poor children, for programs to combat child abuse and neglect, and for an important initiative to train pediatricians and other doctors at children's hospitals across the country. We shouldn't have been surprised by that, either. After all, we learned last summer, even as Mr. Bush was vowing to ''leave no child behind,'' that the state of Texas had not bothered to comply with a 1996 consent decree requiring it to provide appropriate health care services to more than 1.5 million children who were eligible for Medicaid. A federal judge ruled, among other things, that the state had failed to inform indigent families about the availability of health services, that managed-care plans to which some indigent Texans had been assigned were not providing the required services, and that approximately one million eligible individuals had received no dental care. Susan Zinn, a San Antonio lawyer who filed a class-action lawsuit that led to the consent decree, said, ''Basically, what we have is a Medicaid program in shambles.''Mr. Bush's most important decision during the campaign was his selection of a running mate, and he chose Dick Cheney. Mr. Cheney has an avuncular persona, and that can fool you. When he was in Congress he had an absolutely extreme right-wing voting record, and his votes on issues of importance to children were shameful. He voted repeatedly against funding for Head Start, although he now says he is for it. He voted against subsidizing school lunches for poor children. He voted against aid to college students. So there is no real reason now to be surprised that the Bush-Cheney administration is attempting to do serious damage to programs that help children. Nor should we be surprised at the disclosure in yesterday's Times that the president will propose deep cuts in a variety of health programs for people without health insurance. Adam Clymer, the Times reporter who was mocked by Mr. Bush, reminded us last April that ''Texas has had one of the nation's worst public health records for decades.'' The state ranked near the top in rates of AIDS, diabetes, tuberculosis and teenage pregnancy, and near the bottom in immunizations, mammograms and access to physicians. There is no telling how much bad news lies ahead. On a whole range of issues, the president appears committed to bringing the Texas model to the rest of the nation.

When Republicans lose elections, they respond as if the loss were someone else's mistake, or even a cosmic disturbance in the nature of things. They vow to stick to their guns, redouble their efforts and restore the proper order next time. When Democrats lose elections, they experience defeat as total repudiation and start asking themselves the kind of existential questions inspired by an encounter with death: What is the basis for my being? What is the purpose of all my efforts? Have I already died? These mental habits partly account for the far greater single-mindedness of the Republicans in the Battle of Florida: from Election Day on they acted as if they had a natural right to win. But since President Bush's inauguration, the party that won the presidential popular vote and an equal split in the Senate, while staying about even in the House, has largely fallen silent in the face of repeated provocation. When President Bush broke his campaign promise to cap carbon dioxide emissions and then shrugged off the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, Al Gore, the candidate who won the popular vote by half a million, was apparently too busy mending fences in Tennessee to say one word about an issue that once inspired him to write an entire book. One might imagine that the Democrats' confusion or paralysis is due to their being used to holding power. In fact, it's the opposite. They have retreated to a deeply familiar posture: the defensive cringe. The psychology of defeat is strongly ingrained in Democrats, especially those under 50. Born in 1960, I had entered my fourth decade before I cast a vote for a winning presidential candidate. Many of the party's recent heroes made their reputations and gave their great speeches amid the pathos of noble defeat: Eugene McCarthy resurrecting Adlai Stevenson at the 1960 convention (''Do not leave this prophet without honor in his own party''); Edward Kennedy in 1980, Mario Cuomo in 1984 and Jesse Jackson in 1988 making passionate appeals to the party's traditional commitment to the downtrodden. The conservative movement of the late 20th century framed the terms of political debate so successfully that the Democratic position became the embattled view on a host of issues. For years, Democrats tried to win elections by disguising or blurring their true thoughts, or else by exchanging them for others. They weren't for more spending, just fiscal responsibility. They weren't really against tax cuts, but they wanted to save Social Security first. They wanted to mend affirmative action, not end it. They wouldn't ask, and they wouldn't tell. The Clinton years helped rid Democrats of the labels -- soft on crime and welfare, big-spending, unpatriotic -- that had stuck to them since the 60's. But the habits of mental defensiveness and disguise are not as easy to break, and it's possible that for some the disguise became reality. Mr. Clinton himself achieved most of his success by turning these habits into a master strategy. Throughout the 90's, the rationale for the party's creeping centrism was victory. Now, out of power, Democrats enjoy the luxury of being, in terms of their positions on issues, an opposition party closer to the majority of Americans than is the party in power -- with that much more freedom to say what they mean. The question is, do Democrats know what they mean? And if they know, can they break old habits and say it now that the price is no longer likely defeat? The election of 2000 was not the election of 1980 or 1994. The once-formidable conservative movement is spent. If the second Bush presidency has a governing ideology, it isn't the populist conservatism that emboldened Republicans from Ronald Reagan to Newt Gingrich with the potent message, ''Get the government off my back.'' It's simply, ''Long live big business,'' the philosophy of McKinley, Harding and Coolidge. According to a recent poll, two-thirds of Americans think President Bush cares more about the interests of large corporations than about the interests of ordinary people. This is not a philosophy that Republicans can speak plainly, so they find themselves in the disadvantageous position that Democrats held for so long: they have to blur and disguise, to manipulate language into sequences of poll-tested catchwords like ''civility'' and ''bipartisan.'' But in case there's any lingering doubt, the administration's actions, from ergonomics to arsenic, indicate that the disguise is only that. George W. Bush's presidency is almost forcing Democrats to declare their core belief. Do they have one as simple and powerful as the Republicans' ''freedom''? For most of the party's history, it could be summed up in the word ''equality.'' In the 19th century, the Democratic idea of equality meant opposition to government interventions in economic life because these tended to favor the wealthy and powerful. In the 20th century, equality meant support for government programs that insulated ordinary people against the harsher effects of industrial capitalism. Perhaps the word will mean something different in the 21st century. A useful role for the Democratic Party would be to articulate it. Today the word equality might not fly with focus groups; it is easily taken to mean coercive redistribution or, in the Republicans' favorite phrase, class warfare. Throughout American history, it has almost always meant equality of opportunity, not of condition. But when the ideal of equal opportunity is mocked by vast inequality of condition, Americans start losing their sense of a common purpose or fate. This is increasingly the reality in an age of Internet billionaires, the working poor and a middle class left largely alone by government to deal with vast economic changes. President Bush's actions and proposals make the mockery of equality complete, and nothing demonstrates this more dramatically than his drive to eliminate the estate tax, a move that would entrench a hereditary aristocracy like the one that created George W. Bush. The fact that total repeal of the estate tax now seems unlikely shows that a bias toward equality still informs Americans' sensibilities. The fact that it took a public campaign by billionaires to bring those sensibilities into focus shows the lack of direction from the Democratic Party leadership. It's a mistake, though, to think of a party just in terms of its leaders. Waiting for someone to step forward and replace the disgraced Bill Clinton or the muted Al Gore is beside the point. Both parties have become fund-raising machines, and the only way to change their direction is the hard way, from below. In a new book, ''Before the Storm,'' Rick Perlstein shows how grass-roots Republicans responded to Barry Goldwater's landslide defeat in 1964 -- not by trying to install new party leaders, but by forming think tanks, training activists, knocking on doors and electing true believers to local offices. Conservative Republicans, who knew what they were about, refused to be discouraged by a mere 16-million-vote defeat. Instead, they took it to mean that they could move the country in their direction. By 1980 their new Goldwater had emerged as president. Al Gore lost, officially, by 537 votes. All that's left is for Democrats to decide what they're about. George Packer is the author of ''The Village of Waiting'' and, most recently, ''Blood of the Liberals.''

Under fire for a Bush administration seen as hostile to the environment, Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, issued a plea for patience today, saying critics had been too quick to denounce early decisions. On global warming and arsenic in drinking water, the two areas in which reversals by the White House have attracted the most criticism, Mrs. Whitman said the administration was working hard to develop better, more balanced policies than those that had been set aside. But in her first address to a major environmental organization, Mrs. Whitman met with considerable skepticism. After she left the podium, the head of the National Wildlife Federation, which has a bipartisan, middle-of-the-road reputation, appealed to her ''to call a truce in what is beginning to look like a war on the environment.''''We can't stand idly by and watch what is beginning to look like a cascade of efforts to roll back progress on the environment,'' said Mark Van Putten, the president of the wildlife federation, which had not joined other environmental groups in their criticism of the administration. The tense exchange at a hotel here came as the administration was facing sharper criticism from other environmental groups, one of which has already called for Mrs. Whitman's resignation, and from Congressional Democrats who have urged the White House to reconsider many of its early environmental actions. The environmental group that has called for Mrs. Whitman's resignation is Friends of the Earth, which endorsed former Vice President Al Gore last fall. The organization said Mrs. Whitman's defense of the administration positions cost her any credibility as a moderate. Mrs. Whitman, the former New Jersey governor, had advised the White House against its decision to come out against the Kyoto treaty on global warming. But in her address today, and in comments to reporters afterward, she assumed the role of a committed loyalist, saying she ''obviously'' did not agree with Mr. Van Putten's characterization and offering the most extensive defense to date of the administration's environmental policy making. Mrs. Whitman told reporters that critics had been exaggerating the impact of ''one or two decisions that people might disagree with'' while minimizing others generally seen as more favorable to the environment. One of those decisions left in place a Clinton administration rule forcing drastic reductions in emissions of pollutants by buses and big trucks, even though that action had been opposed by the oil industry. On arsenic, on which the Bush administration abandoned a strict drinking-water standard approved by the Clinton administration, Mrs. Whitman said for the first time that ''there's a very good likelihood'' that  a review now under way might result in a recommendation of an even tougher standard. On global warming, Mrs. Whitman elaborated on earlier defenses of the administration's decisions to set aside the Kyoto treaty and to reverse a campaign promise to regulate power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide. Both actions have been criticized within the United States and abroad. Mrs. Whitman said President Bush ''wants to be proactive on the issue; he wants to move forward.''''But I think you'll agree,'' she said, ''that we are better off moving forward than fighting battles we may have already lost.''Mrs. Whitman's comment was an allusion to the strong sentiment against the Kyoto accord that the Senate expressed in 1997, even before the treaty was signed. In place of the treaty's approach, which would have required the United States and other industrialized countries to meet strict standards for reductions of emissions of heat-trapping gases, Mrs. Whitman said the administration was seeking to develop an alternative that would emphasize ''technology, market-based incentives and other innovative approaches.''Outside the room where Mrs. Whitman spoke, the National Wildlife Federation had posted signs calling the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska ''too wild to drill,'' a rallying cry in opposition to another administration policy. Mrs. Whitman did not explicitly defend the administration's effort to win Congressional approval for oil drilling in the refuge. But she did express frustration at the difficulty the administration faced in coming up with new supplies of energy.''Nobody wants to drill for oil because of what that might do to the environment,'' Mrs. Whitman told reporters. ''No one wants oil transmission pipelines because they blow up. No one want to talk about nuclear energy. And even windmills kill birds because they're in the flyway.''The administration is facing deadlines that could force decisions on other environmental issues. By April 17, it must decide whether to leave in place a Clinton administration rule that would sharply lower the threshold for companies that must make public details about their emissions of lead, which can cause severe health problems. Other policies under review include a reassessment of regulations on dioxin and a plan, approved but not put into effect by the Clinton administration, to regulate emissions of mercury from power plants.

Republican moderates are exasperated by President Bush's posture on environmental issues. They are not alone. In less than three months Mr. Bush has begun to remind people of the country's last genuinely anti-environmental president, Ronald Reagan. But where Mr. Reagan's attitude was one of careless indifference -- ''You've seen one redwood, you've seem 'em all,'' was a typical Reaganism -- Mr. Bush's retreat on isses as large as global warming and as localized as poisoned drinking water seems aggressively hostile. It could also be politically ruinous. The president says he must soften environmental rules to prevent a recession. He thus revives the historically insupportable notion that economic progress and environmental protection are incompatible. Further, Mr. Bush appears to have forgotten that Republicans inevitably self-destruct when they challenge environmental values that command public support. Newt Gingrich's hard-line agenda on everything from clean water to endangered species in the mid-1990's succeeded only in energizing the Democrats and persuading Bill Clinton to embark on the aggressive program of wilderness protection that Mr. Bush now seeks to repudiate. If there has been any unifying theme to Mr. Bush's policies, it has been his eagerness to please the oil, gas and mining industries -- indeed, extractive industries of all kinds. The oil and coal mining companies helped shape his decision to withdraw from the Kyoto Protocol on climate change as well as his earlier reversal of a campaign pledge to impose mandatory limits on carbon dioxide. These were hasty and ill-conceived decisions that have essentially left the United States without a policy on a matter of global importance. The mining industry also had a hand in two other rollbacks. One was a decision to withdraw a Clinton rule that reduced by 80 percent the permissible standard for arsenic in drinking water. The other was a decision by Interior Secretary Gale Norton to suspend important new regulations that would require mining companies to pay for cleanups and, for the first time, give the Interior Department authority to prohibit mines that could cause ''irreparable harm'' to the environment. Mr. Bush seems to be backing off his plan to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration, in part because Congress will not support him. But other sensitive and ecologically significant areas, particularly in the Rocky Mountains, remain vulnerable. Ms. Norton has targeted some 17 million acres of land, in 11 Western states, now designated as wilderness study areas. Mr. Bush is prepared to open up the 19 national monuments created by Mr. Clinton. And the administration has signaled a retreat on Mr. Clinton's most ambition conservation measure -- a Forest Service rule protecting nearly 60 million acres of largely untouched national forest from new road building, new oil and gas leasing and most new logging. Killing that plan would represent a big victory not only for the timber companies but also for the the oil and gas industries. Although the roadless areas contain less than 1 percent of the nation's oil and gas resources, the energy companies have long had the forests in their sights. During his distinguished tenure as Mr. Clinton's Forest Service chief, Mike Dombeck managed to keep the drillers at bay. But Mr. Dombeck has now retired to private life, along with nearly every other friend of the environment from the Clinton administration. With few exceptions, they have been replaced by industry lobbyists and hard-edged advocates of development. It will be Congress's job to hold the line against them.

In bringing the imbroglio with China successfully to an end, President Bush displayed qualities that had not been evident since he entered the White House. He was measured, and sensitive to the other party's interests and political needs. It was in striking contrast to foreign policy moves that had U.S. allies talking worriedly about his unilateralism, arrogance, bullying. One was his sudden cancellation of talks with North Korea -- to the embarrassment of the South Korean president, Kim Dae Jung, who was visiting Washington at the time. Another was his disavowal of the Kyoto protocol on global warming, which shocked Europeans. Mr. Bush learned and adjusted during the China episode. After first brusquely demanding return of the U.S. spy plane's crew, he moderated his tone. He paid no attention to right-wing calls for punitive action, which would have delayed the crew's return and harmed both Chinese and American interests. (After the crew was freed he spoke more critically of China: a gesture to the right.)The lesson of the episode should not have been lost on Mr. Bush. For all its power, the United States cannot just impose its will on the world. Unilateralism has limits, and costs. The interesting question now is whether Mr. Bush will think about applying that lesson in domestic affairs. For on a whole host of domestic policy issues he has sought to impose his will even more starkly. Environmental policy is a signal example. Mr. Bush and his people have proposed radical policy changes in defiance of public feelings and of his own campaign promises. In a campaign speech in Miami last August, for instance, Mr. Bush said he would ask Congress to relieve developing countries of $100 million in debt in exchange for the protection of tropical forests. ''These forests,'' he said, ''affect the air we breathe, the food we eat, medicines that cure disease, and are home to more than half of earth's animal and plant species.''But in the budget he announced this week, Mr. Bush allowed just $13 million for tropical forest conservation. And that money will not come from a direct appropriation but will be diverted from the Agency for International Development. Other policy changes made by the administration have outraged the most moderate of environmental organizations. The steps include disavowal of Mr. Bush's campaign promise to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and indications that the administration will allow road-building in now-protected areas of the national forests. The latest environmental move is notable for its sweeping character and slippery means. That is the Bush budget proposal that would undermine lawsuits to require the listing of particular animals and plants as endangered species. Instead of trying directly to amend the Endangered Species Act, the proposal would prohibit the expenditure of any funds to carry out court orders for listing -- orders that up till now have forced most of the protective steps. Officials would be required to disregard court orders: a terrible proposition in a country that prides itself on adherence to law. Passing these and similar proposals would involve Mr. Bush in bloody battles. The somnolent Democrats could be aroused by the environment issues. Al Gore, who has disappeared without a trace, could re-emerge. More important to Mr. Bush, his suburban supporters who care about the environment could become disaffected. A certain logic, then, would counsel Mr. Bush to consult, consider the other side's interests and try to find mutual accommodations -- on the pattern of the China episode. But there is a sharp difference in the situations. Mr. Bush came to office with no profound foreign policy commitments. But in domestic matters it is payback time for his supporters -- the right, business, religious groups. And there is a sense of vengeance, of getting even for years of frustration over, say, developers' inability to gut the Endangered Species Act. And Mr. Bush's own ideology is involved, not only his supporters' wishes. But on environmental issues, above all, unilateralism is dangerous to him. Does he want to be remembered as a president who knowingly left the world a worse place for his children and grandchildren?

The Environmental Protection Agency's new administrator, Christie Whitman, had no trouble connecting with her audience at a recent meeting of the Business Roundtable, a group of corporate executives, as she promised that the agency's history of ''banging heads'' was a thing of the past. And her bluntly antiregulatory message undercut the notion that Mrs. Whitman was at least a moderately gung-ho green who had been hung out to dry by her president. That impression had taken hold after President Bush, responding to pressures from the energy industry, broke a campaign pledge to put a cap on power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide, right after she had talked up his intention to control that greenhouse gas. Then, after she urged him ''to appear engaged'' on controlling global warming, the administration decided instead to write the obituary of the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty on climate change. Even some environmental advocates were starting to pity Mrs. Whitman's supposed isolation.''It's been a pretty rough ride,'' said Greg Wetstone of the Natural Resources Defense Council. ''She's probably suffered one of the most immediate and embarrassing eviscerations of a new cabinet secretary ever.''Mr. Wetstone said he had been willing to re-evaluate the Bush administration if it regulated carbon dioxide, ''which is amazing because I'm a little cynical from doing this for a long time.''''I felt like such a fool,'' Mr. Wetstone said. Like other environmentalists, he  seemed to assume that Mrs. Whitman felt the fool, too. But in a recent interview in her office, she argued that she had felt nothing at all after learning of the president's reversal.''It had nothing to do with me personally,'' she said. Conceding that she ''had been in a different place'' at first, she said she had come to accept the president's view that such regulation would be too costly to the economy and to consumers.''He was right, all things considered,'' Mrs. Whitman said. ''We're in an energy crisis, no two ways about it.''She never considered resigning, she said.''New Jersey was good training; we've got a lot of cranky people,'' she said. ''I just decided to do the best I could on the facts and stay away from reading the columnists.''Yet she would leave, she said, if she ever truly felt ''out of sync'' with the president; ''that hasn't happened yet,'' she said firmly. Allies in New Jersey say she differs with the president less on policy than on the politics of decisions that have been viewed as unfriendly to the environment. And friends suggest that Mrs. Whitman is in general far less liberal than her reputation, earned mainly on the basis of her support for abortion rights.''She's done some very socially conservative things; her record is not liberal,'' said her best friend, Nancy Risque Rohrbach, director of the National Museum of Women in the Arts, who has known Mrs. Whitman, 54, since their first year out of college, when they were both working for the Republican National Committee. ''She defies labels.''Environmentalists in New Jersey would agree; groups pushing for more environmental regulation generally considered her ''good on the green, bad on the brown,'' because she expanded the state's open space, but cut enforcement of air and water quality standards, abolished an environmental prosecutor's office and eased reporting rules for companies that handle toxic materials. In the interview, she defended a proposed 6.4 percent cut in the Environmental Protection Agency's budget, though environmentalists say it will probably mean layoffs among those responsible for enforcing environmental standards. ''We haven't been cut,'' she said. Only superfluous congressionally mandated programs were being trimmed, she said. At the meeting of the Business Roundtable, a closed event that a reporter seemed to have been invited to by accident and then was asked to leave before a question-and-answer period began, Mrs. Whitman seemed completely comfortable echoing Mr. Bush's pro-business philosophy. She opened her chummy talk this way: ''I hope you all had a successful day today and did the appropriate lobbying with the right senators.''''When the president says he wants to look at government as a partnership'' with private enterprise, ''he really means it,'' she told the executives, though it is hard to imagine who among them might have remained unconvinced of his sincerity on this point. She sounded thoroughly opposed to regulation when she said, ''While it's true that mandatory controls may have been necessary in the beginning, attitudes have changed, and we recognize that at the E.P.A.''Of her decision to review the Clinton administration's regulations cutting the amount of naturally occurring arsenic that would be allowed in municipal drinking water, she said she ''did that with no pressure from the White House, no pressure from interest groups.'' The Clinton rule, which environmentalists say is necessary to protect the public's health, was opposed by the mining industry and some municipalities, which argued that its costs were prohibitive. Mrs. Whitman has said elsewhere that once the administration studies the matter, it may well adopt a more stringent arsenic standard than the one adopted under Mr. Clinton. But at the Business Roundtable, she said explicitly that she was concerned about how cutting arsenic levels might affect business: ''The impact is enormous on small and mid-sized water companies. We are going to take another look and see what it is we have to do to avoid unintended consequences.''Environmentalists are increasingly disillusioned. As Dan Weiss, former political director of the Sierra Club, put it: ''Another day, another environmental standard wrecked. This is worse than under Reagan.''Paul Begala, a former Clinton aide who worked for Gov. Jim Florio of New Jersey in his losing campaign against Mrs. Whitman in 1993, said he had not been surprised by decisions. ''She always struck me as the consummate country club politician,'' Mr. Begala said. ''I never had a sense she had any passion except for tax cuts, so I guess she fits right in with this administration. It's, 'Let them drink Perrier.' ''But Ms. Rohrbach suggested that the former governor was not only tough enough but also ambitious enough to handle the criticism.''Long ago, when we were young, she knew she wanted to be governor,'' Ms. Rohrbach said. Though she is naturally reserved, it was Christie Todd who asked her future husband, John Whitman, out on their first date, because she needed an escort to the Nixon inauguration. Mr. Whitman's grandfather, Charles S. Whitman, became governor of New York in 1915. And both John and Christie were so sure of her political future that Mr. Whitman's drive to succeed in business was in part fueled by a desire to ''put the kids through school and still be able to fill in for Christie when she ran for office,'' Ms. Rohrbach said. In the interview, where Mrs. Whitman was crisp and correct, keeping on her wool jacket after noting that it was 89 degrees outside, the worst part of her job now, she said, was actually ''being away from my husband after 27 years.'' Mr. Whitman is a financial consultant in New Jersey. Asked to characterize her tenure so far, she had to laugh. ''A roller coaster, shall we say?''In nearly every talk she gives, Mrs. Whitman says she grew up caring for the environment because she was reared on a farm -- an extremely lovely farm, in Oldwick, N.J. Her father, Webster B. Todd, was a wealthy Republican state chairman and her mother, Eleanor Schley Todd, was vice chairwoman of the Republican National Committee. Though it is unclear where Mrs. Whitman expects to go next, for now she seems determined to stick around and figure something out. Meanwhile, she is asking environmental advocates to wait and see what proposals this administration may yet come up with before judging it, and her, too harshly. ''He desperately wants to be proactive,'' she said of the president. ''He hates being on the defensive.''As, of course, does Mrs. Whitman. For the record, she is not accepting condolences for her career just yet. ''If one more person says, 'You have the toughest job in the cabinet, . . .' '' she says, near the end of an hour-long interview. And for the first time, she showed real exasperation.

Last month, the United States rejected the Kyoto Protocol, which seeks to limit global warming by reducing carbon dioxide emissions, because, according to President Bush, it would hurt American industry. But American car makers, copying the methods of their European counterparts, have begun to replace fiberglass with natural plant fibers anyway. Using such fibers can save much of the energy needed to make a car and result in parts that are 40 percent lighter -- and biodegradable. By 2010, the New Jersey consulting firm Kline & Company expects natural fibers to replace a fifth of the fiberglass in today's automobile interiors. WHAT'S THAT SMELL? In North America, plant stalks replaced 2 percent of the fiberglass in mats, seat backs and other plastic composites last year; hemp dominated this field. The crop is at least 65 cents cheaper per pound than fiberglass; it also grows perennially and can be recycled easily. In breadbasket states, lawmakers are examining industrial hemp production as a way of boosting farm income. Too bad it's a controlled substance. The Illinois legislature approved financing for a study earlier this year (though the governor vetoed it), and the Nebraska legislature is debating legalization. WHAT'S THE HARM? One problem, but a big one: even though the stalks have negligible narcotic effects, the Drug Enforcement Agency almost always views growing industrial hemp -- cannabis, after all -- as tantamount to growing weed. Susie Dugan, the executive director of the antidrug group Pride Omaha, insists that industrial hemp licenses would give cover to pot peddlers and that drug-prevention activists would have to warn others about the hemp car's drug-promoting message. WHAT ELSE IS GROWING? It is the use of natural fibers in car doors and trunks that would constitute the real engineering triumph -- and car makers are getting there. A company called Indiana Bio-Composites will make a recyclable exterior panel for a mobile home from kenaf, a cordlike hibiscus, in the next two years. Nick Tucker, a University of Warwick researcher, is working to convert a nine-foot-tall crop known as elephant grass into a tough material fit for biodegradable car bodies by 2006. If the plants fail, all is not lost on the reduced-emissions front. G.M., in partnership with Hormel, recently brewed up GMBond, a nontoxic mold for casting metals, from ''turkey and pork byproducts.''-- Alec Appelbaum

This Earth Day differs from the celebratory occasions that the environmental community grew accustomed to during the last half of Bill Clinton's tenure. Early on, Mr. Clinton was the despair of conservationists, but he wound up with an exceptional record of achievement. Other modern presidents made big contributions, too. Jimmy Carter set aside huge areas of Alaska as wilderness. Richard Nixon, like Mr. Clinton, was not by instinct an environmentalist, but he had the political sense to give his blessing to the great wave of legislation on clean air, clean water and wilderness protection that Congress approved in the early 1970's. George W. Bush seems headed in the opposite direction, although there were signs last week that the White House was beginning to take note of polls showing that moderate voters do not like his approach. One of his first acts was to suspend a half-dozen of the Clinton administration's environmental rules, which Mr. Bush's people persist in labeling ''last-minute'' regulations, though most had been in the works for years. He then embarked on several precipitous moves of his own -- reversing a campaign pledge to cut carbon dioxide emissions, suspending rules requiring mining companies to observe sound environmental practices and weakening enforcement of the Endangered Species Act. These were minor affronts to the Clinton legacy. The two defining environmental decisions of Mr. Bush's early months have been his renunciation of the Kyoto agreements on global warming and the beginning of what may be a broad effort to turn the oil and mining industries loose on public lands, many of which deserve special protection. Mr. Bush's decision to abandon Kyoto has international ramifications. Kyoto is a flawed instrument, and the Europeans were foolishly resisting various trading mechanisms that would ease the costs of the treaty without undercutting its objectives. But instead of negotiating a better treaty, Mr. Bush simply pulled out, leaving America without a coherent policy and removing from the bargaining table the world's largest producer of greenhouse gases. Here at home, meanwhile, Mr. Bush seems bent on carving out large swaths of public land to satisfy his appetite for new energy reserves. His interior secretary, Gale Norton, is talking about making ''boundary adjustments'' to allow commercial activity in some of the 22 national monuments created or expanded by Mr. Clinton. More ominously, his administration has signaled a willingness to retreat from Mr. Clinton's most ambitious conservation measure -- a rule protecting nearly 60 million acres of largely untouched national forest from new oil and gas leasing and most new logging. Mr. Bush's intentions will become clearer when the secretive task force led by Vice President Dick Cheney discloses the administration's energy strategy next month. Nobody doubts the need for a coherent energy plan, and the country is probably willing to cut Mr. Bush some slack in his search for natural gas, the fuel of choice for newer and cleaner power plants. But the polls have also shown that the public is not prepared to sacrifice areas of clear ecological value, whether in the Arctic Wildlife Refuge or the national forests. Perhaps mindful of unfavorable polls, the White House has lately been trying to put a better face on things. Three Clinton-era regulations have been allowed to stand. The most important of these was a controversial rule that would greatly restrict the emissions of soot and other pollutants from diesel-powered vehicles. Last week, Christie Whitman, the Environmental Protection Agency administrator, announced with great fanfare a decision to support a Clinton administration rule protecting wetlands. It is possible that Mrs. Whitman is pushing the White House toward more enlightened policies. Still, there is something pathetic and potentially deceptive about these triumphal exercises. The occasional decision to uphold existing law should not divert our attention from the more fundamental question of whether Mr. Bush is going to allow his Interior Department to become a captive of the oil and mining industries.

Let the Bush administration restudy what concentration of arsenic is acceptable in drinking water. One thing is clear: the issue has been very good for Democrats. After three months of uncertainty over where to draw bright lines of opposition, Congressional Democrats have found a rallying cry and gone on the offensive against President Bush for early environmental rollbacks. Throughout the Congressional recess, Democrats, from the party's  presidential hopefuls to the most politically vulnerable House members, have struck the same themes, trying to use Mr. Bush's actions -- including the decision to delay carrying out the Clinton administration's tougher arsenic standard -- to undercut the president's image with moderates. It is a concerted public relations campaign, amplified in television advertising by environmental advocacy groups, that is expected to reach a crescendo on Sunday, the 31st anniversary of Earth Day. Some of the publicity is intended to put pressure on Republican moderates in Congress to help defeat such Bush efforts as his call to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil and gas exploration. But Democrats also have their eye on 2002, when control of the House and Senate is at stake. And gleeful party strategists say Mr. Bush has given them a way to appeal to the swing voters who will matter most: the suburban mothers and independents whom Mr. Bush courted with his emphasis on education .''Republicans did make some progress in the last cycle in talking like Democrats,'' said James M. Jordan, the executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. ''This is an issue where we can get some clear, obvious, verifiable separation from the Republicans,'' Mr. Jordan said. The Democratic assault has been building for weeks. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a possible presidential contender, told the Colorado Democratic Party late last month, ''It is hard to accept that the Supreme Court has given us an administration that is content to allow one in every 100 Americans with certainty to get cancer from drinking water they have a right to believe is safe.''Representative Jay Inslee of Washington plans to remind runners racing on Sunday to protest global warming that Mr. Bush has reversed himself on a pledge to regulate carbon dioxide emissions. ''It's stunning to me how rapidly the president has caused folks in suburban areas to focus on this issue,'' he said. And ground zero in the environmental wars may have been the pump house of a closed arsenic-plagued well in Hopewell Borough, N.J., where Representatives Rush D. Holt and Frank Pallone Jr. spoke out on Wednesday against the arsenic rule rollback. The well, after all, is in a swing state, not just any swing state but the home state of former Gov. Christie Whitman of New Jersey, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. And it is in Mr. Holt's Congressional district -- one of the most competitive House districts in the nation, encompassing Princeton University, new office complexes, farmland and suburban sprawl. Mr. Holt, a former assistant director of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, said he considered the environment and related concerns about suburban sprawl and open space part of a cluster of issues that had helped him prevail in an area long considered safely Republican. And he said his constituents, including many Republicans, had taken notice of events in Washington.  ''Arsenic,'' he said. ''That hit a nerve because arsenic sounds like poison.'' He added that a number of people who had voted for Mr. Bush had told him, ''If I had known,'' or ''I should have known.''And on Wednesday, he was stoking those sentiments at a news conference, expounding on arsenic. ''When the old standards were devised years ago, no one knew about the cancer-causing effects of arsenic,'' he told reporters. ''They only knew about acute arsenic poisoning.''Republican strategists say that issues like tax cuts, education and energy will prove more important to voters in the long run than the environment, and that in those districts where environmental concerns run high, moderate Republicans will have voting records that suit their constituents''I think where it really matters, the Republicans won't cede the issue,'' said Jim McLaughlin, a pollster for the National Republican Congressional Committee. The White House has also moved fast to try to repair any political damage from a string of actions in March that included the rejection of the international Kyoto treaty on global warming. Every day this week, senior administration officials participated in showy White House announcements to soften the president's environmental image. In rapid succession, Mr. Bush agreed to Clinton administration regulations on wetlands preservation and allowed Clinton rules on lead emissions to go forward. The administration said it would sign a treaty negotiated in the Clinton presidency phasing out persistent toxic chemicals that are already banned in many developed nations. And Ms. Whitman indicated the administration would eventually toughen arsenic rules after further study. Dan Bartlett, a deputy assistant to the president, said that over time,  ''Americans will say that this president has taken a very reasonable way'' on the environment. ''The president is committed to funding programs that work and making sure local stakeholders have a voice in the process,'' he said. ''That is a departure from some on the left who would prefer that everything be controlled and dictated out of Washington.''Democrats are not relenting. Senator Barbara Boxer of California simply dismissed the week's White House announcements. ''What he did this week was nothing,'' she said. ''He didn't overturn a regulation on lead. That's hardly a clarion call on the environment when you don't repeal something.''One question is whether the environment really galvanizes voters. Steve Elmendorf, chief of staff to Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House Democratic leader, says the environment works better as a campaign theme ''when voters who care about these issues feel they are threatened.''The Gallup Poll, in a survey taken for Earth Day, found the environment ranks 16th on Americans' list of most important problems facing the country today. But it is their top concern for 25 years from now. Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster who recently briefed Senate Democratic aides on her findings, said that the issue appealed most to independents, and that it resonated most particularly when it was tied to the idea of favors for special interests. ''They're antipolitical feelings as well as pro-environment feelings,'' she said.

Some regions of the country are short of electric power, and the price of natural gas, the most popular fuel for new power plants, has doubled. Windmills look promising but still produce only a tiny amount of power; solar power is even less significant. Nuclear reactors are now so desirable that when old ones go on sale, bidding wars have broken out. And the Bush administration's energy plan, scheduled for release soon, is expected to include strong support for new reactor construction. Does that mean it is time to order new ones? Not quite, according to a number of experts gathered at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology here to talk about the role of technology in a time of growing electric demand and increased concern about pollution. But after a 30-year hiatus, the time may be drawing closer.''There's some change in the wind,'' said Charles M. Vest, president of M.I.T., helping to open a two-day International Symposium on the Role of Nuclear Energy in a Sustainable Environment, sponsored by the university's Center for Advanced Nuclear Systems. Experts from France, Japan, Russia and the United States discussed designs that might be feasible in 30 years, or in 3 years. The group acknowledged obvious problems, like the fact that this country has still not decided what to do with reactor waste, but presumed that either a burial spot would be found or plants would be built to break down the waste or reuse it. The industry's trade association, the Nuclear Energy Institute, has assembled a task force on new nuclear deployment, which has met four times to draw up a business plan for new reactors. Participants include five companies that either operate or have recently bought plants -- Dominion Resources of Virginia, Entergy of New Orleans, Exelon of Chicago, Constellation Energy of Maryland and the Southern Company of Georgia. Industry executives say that the first new order for a reactor, if it comes, is likely to be at a site where other plants are already operating and the neighbors are used to a nuclear installation. As for what a new plant might look like, a great deal has changed since 1973, when the last plant that was not later canceled was ordered, and even since 1996, when the last one was finished. Experts say the designs or construction techniques of the 1970's are no more likely to return than other wonders of that era, like the Boeing 727 or the Saturn V rocket. One possibility is the ''pebble bed'' design, which circulates uranium fuel pellets shaped like billiard balls through the reactor and generates only about one-tenth as much heat per square foot as a conventional reactor. As a result, supporters assert that it cannot have a meltdown. The fuel balls in the pebble bed design are replaced as needed, but the reactor never has to shut down for refueling. The Exelon Corporation, which owns 17 reactors in this country, joined a partnership with a South African utility, Eskom, another South African company and BNFL, formerly known as British Nuclear Fuels, to build one in South Africa.  Exelon has asked the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to look at this design, but has not announced plans to build one in the United States. Other possible new designs range from simplified, refined versions of the Westinghouse and General Electric models in service today to the pebble bed. The regulatory commission approved new Westinghouse and General Electric designs in the late 1990's, and that, in itself, is a change; designs for the current generation of plants were not approved until the plants were built, sometimes leading to licensing delays. The nuclear division of Westinghouse, now owned by BNFL, says that its design has 60 percent fewer moving parts -- with fewer pumps, wires and pipes -- and that there is less to build and less to go wrong. It also has stairs in places where older designs had ladders, to accommodate an aging nuclear power plant work force. A new General Electric design is also meant to be simpler and safer. In 1996 a utility in Japan completed a reactor that resembled the design approved by American regulators. But other changes since the 1970's do not bode well for new reactor construction. In those days, the utilities that built generating stations were regulated monopolies that could take on large projects with the assurance that their customers would pay the price almost no matter what it was.''Somebody else was paying for your mistakes,'' said David Lochbaum, a nuclear reactor expert at the Union of Concerned Scientists, a nonprofit safety group, who did not attend the meeting here. Now, most power plants are built by unregulated suppliers that could be bankrupted by the cost overruns that were common when the last of the 103 reactors still running were completed. The unregulated companies prefer plants that can be put up quickly, with less financial risk. Nuclear waste is a more pressing problem than when the first plants were built. California, for example, has made it illegal to begin new reactors until the waste problem is solved. In every state, that will be an argument. The Energy Department was supposed to begin accepting spent fuel from reactors in 1998, but work on its proposed permanent repository, Yucca Mountain, near Las Vegas, has been slow. So far scientists have not ruled on its suitability. In addition, there are promising competitors, including windmills and fuel cells. Even though President Bush's budget proposes cuts in money available to research alternative forms of energy, many researchers are pursuing new technologies. And energy planners have been wrong for decades in prematurely predicting the end of oil, gas and coal.''When everybody in this room dies, fossil fuels are going to be abundant and inexpensive,'' said Michael W. Golay, a nuclear engineering professor here, to a gathering of about 40 nuclear experts. Supporters say that with improved reliability and design, the new generation of reactors will be less expensive to operate than the competing sources of electricity, coal and natural gas. But the numbers remain somewhat speculative. Still, the industry is getting a second look, for some of the same reasons nuclear power seemed attractive in the 1960's and 70's. Supporters argue that fossil fuel supplies are limited, that the United States should be developing technology to help the world electrify, and that pollution, especially emissions linked to global climate change, is a concern. Still, the industry was not helped by Mr. Bush's decision to drop the Kyoto accord on limiting carbon dioxide emissions. But another recent development has helped: the rise in the price of natural gas. About 90 percent of the plants built in the last 10 years use natural gas, but in California last winter, the price of that fuel reached $60 per million British thermal units, equivalent to oil at about $350 a barrel, or about seven times the current price, and some analysts expect it to stay in the range of $4 to $6 per million B.T.U., up from $2 to $3 a year ago. In response, some companies have announced plans to build coal-burning plants, but these require costly pollution controls, and even then, they will emit sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, which cause acid rain and smog. The plants also produce carbon dioxide, which may eventually be regulated as a contributor to global climate change. Environmental advocates call for investments in efficiency, and in ''renewable'' sources like wind and solar, but so far those sources are tiny compared with demand. The Chernobyl nuclear accident in Ukraine was 15 years ago, and Three Mile Island was 22 years ago; meanwhile, American reactors are operating with a record low level of minor incidents, and producing more power than ever. Plants are having their 40-year licenses extended for 20 years. The result, said Paul Jaskow, a former chairman of the economics department at M.I.T. and an expert on regulated industries, is that ''there has not been a better time for nuclear power in the last 25 years.''But Mr. Jaskow, analyzing the recent power plant sales and separating the components, like long-term power purchase agreements, trust funds for reactor decommissioning, and sale of nuclear fuel, concluded, that ''none of these deals even comes close to covering the book costs.''''You couldn't justify paying $2,000 or $3,000 per kilowatt for those plants,'' he said, referring to the price per unit capacity. Supporters say they could build plants for about $1,000 per kilowatt of capacity, but similar claims in the 1960's and 70's were way off, and nearly bankrupted some utilities. The regulatory commission has simplified the licensing procedure, to reduce the possibility of lengthy delays, but industry experts are skeptical because the new procedure has not been used. Investors would have to expect a huge competitive benefit from nuclear plants to risk putting money in a new one, Mr. Jaskow said, ''because of the significant possibility of coming up with a dry hole.''Correction:  April 28, 2001, Saturday  An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a resurgence of interest in nuclear power included a company erroneously among members of a task force on new nuclear deployment set up by the industry's trade association, the Nuclear Energy Institute. Constellation Energy of Maryland is not a member. The article also misspelled the surname of a former economics chairman at M.I.T. who said this was a good time for nuclear power. He is Paul L. Joskow, not Jaskow. Correction: April 28, 2001, SaturdayAn article in Business Day on Tuesday about a resurgence of interest in nuclear power included a company erroneously among members of a task force on new nuclear deployment set up by the industry's trade association, the Nuclear Energy Institute. Constellation Energy of Maryland is not a member. The article also misspelled the surname of a former economics chairman at M.I.T. who said this was a good time for nuclear power. He is Paul L. Joskow, not Jaskow.<br><br><br>

In the wake of its rejection of an international treaty to curtail global warming, the Bush administration is seeking advice from a wide array of scientists, economists, business representatives and policy experts as it tries to forge a new approach to the contentious issue. Most of those consulted, senior government officials said, are asserting that the science pointing to a serious problem is sound, and that there is need for concrete action to stem rising levels of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases emitted by smokestacks and tailpipes. Although the new effort is mainly taking the form of cabinet briefings behind closed doors, it is widely seen as a substantial broadening of a process that until recently was so tightly controlled by a small circle of advisers that cabinet members themselves often gave conflicting accounts of President Bush's plans. The broadening has elicited expressions of cautious relief from environmental campaigners and frustration by conservatives and skeptics about warming's dangers. But both sides said they could not predict how the review would influence the Bush administration, which is under pressure to devise an alternative to the rejected climate treaty.''This group is reaching out for a diversity of views on climate issues,'' said Ken Lisaius, a White House spokesman. ''This is a very serious matter that the president takes very seriously.''At the briefings, held about once a week over the last month, half a dozen members of Mr. Bush's cabinet and, most of the time, Vice President Dick Cheney have spent a couple of hours in what amounts to Climate 101. The list of speakers has been dominated by scientists and policy experts who believe that a recent global warming trend is at least partly caused by humans, poses serious risks and requires a significant response to stem the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The presenters have included Dr. James E. Hansen, a government climate expert who in 1988 testified about the problem before the Senate at the invitation of Al Gore, then a senator from Tennessee, and Dr. Daniel L. Albritton, the head of a federal climate laboratory and a lead author of an international report pointing to serious risks from global warming for coming decades. The report, by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a United Nations group, was widely criticized by conservative groups as biased but has been held up by many others as strong new evidence justifying action. The participants all declined to discuss the substance of the meetings at the request of the White House. But some said they saw the meetings as a sign of new openness on the issue.''It is encouraging that they are spending serious time gathering information and facts in the development of their policy,'' said Kevin Fay, a business official who was a presenter at the most recent briefing, on Tuesday. Mr. Fay is the executive director of the International Climate Change Partnership, an organization representing what he calls ''the progressive cowering middle of industry,'' businesses that seek to be environmental stewards, but with the bottom line in mind. Another sign of the administration's new tack in recent days is its recruitment of seasoned experts in climate issues from the ranks of various agencies as it assembles a team to come up with policy options, which officials plan to present to Mr. Bush by the end of May. Particularly urgent is an effort to come up with an alternative to the Kyoto Protocol, the treaty that was negotiated and signed by the Clinton administration and summarily rejected by Mr. Bush last month. Mr. Bush said that its binding limits on greenhouse gases could harm the economy and that it unfairly excluded fast-growing economic powers like China and India. That decision came shortly after Mr. Bush renounced a campaign pledge he had made to include mandatory carbon dioxide cuts in a cleanup of power plants. Both announcements came after a flurry of lobbying by conservatives who have long opposed restrictions on carbon dioxide, which is, at least for now, a byproduct of almost every activity in modern industrial society. But the announcements produced a flood of bad press and the first bruises for Mr. Bush in some public opinion polls. With the dust settling, there is a growing realization at the White House that the blunt rejection of the treaty may have caused more problems than it solved.''The decisions six weeks ago were made in an appalling vacuum of information,'' said a senior government official involved in the climate policy review, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity.''A substantial portion of the people involved wish they had it to do over again,'' the official said. ''They might still have rejected Kyoto, but probably in a different way. Now you're seeing a genuine effort to get a balanced perspective.''The briefings have been intimate affairs, officials said, including only a handful of White House staff members and a varying roster of cabinet members and government executives -- generally from the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Energy, Interior, State and Treasury, as well as the Environmental Protection Agency. The first two sessions, held at Commerce Department headquarters and then the headquarters of the Environmental Protection Agency, were strictly science. Dr. Albritton defended the international report he helped create. Dr. Ronald J. Stouffer, a designer of computer climate models at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, a government research center in Princeton, N.J., talked about the difficulties posed by clouds, which as yet cannot be modeled accurately and so hamper predictions of the local consequences of a general climate warming. There were props. Dr. Hansen used a one-watt Christmas-tree bulb to represent the extra energy beating down on each half-square-yard of the earth's surface as a result of the growing blanket of greenhouse gases. Dr. Hansen has been of particular interest to the White House because last year he proposed that the best short-term attack on warming might come by focusing not on carbon dioxide but on methane, a less common but more potent greenhouse gas, and soot, which is not mentioned in the Kyoto Protocol but is increasingly thought to contribute both to warming and to serious health problems. Dr. Hansen was invited back to the second session, where he was joined by a prominent skeptic, Dr. Richard S. Lindzen, a meteorology professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who has long held that any climate influence from human activities is inconsequential. In the third session, focusing on economics, the administration stayed close to home, listening to Dr. Richard L. Schmalensee, the dean of the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a member of the Council of Economic Advisers in the administration of Mr. Bush's father. Dr. Schmalensee and other M.I.T. economists have repeatedly asserted that the Kyoto pact is an overly costly insurance policy. On Tuesday, the pendulum swung to experts who support the general goals of the Kyoto treaty but who concede that the existing language is rife with problems. They included Mr. Fay, from the business group, and another former official from the first Bush administration, William K. Reilly, who is the president of the World Wildlife Fund and was administrator of the E.P.A.Now the ball is in Mr. Bush's court, many observers say. The key question is whether he will choose some new way to get governments to agree to binding cuts in greenhouse gases or revert to the approach sought by his father, who at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio signed the Framework Convention on Climate Change, the treaty that preceded the Kyoto document but that called only for voluntary reductions in the gases. Some business groups that opposed the Kyoto treaty have greeted the chance for a fresh approach to the problem. But they also say there is danger in starting from scratch.''We're not talking about totally erasing the blackboard,'' said Norine Kennedy, the vice president for environmental affairs of the United States Council for International Business, which represents several hundred companies. ''There's a lot in the protocol that should be retained.''

We are not among those who complain that the tradition of measuring the first hundred days of a presidency has turned into an empty ritual. It is a convenient way to demarcate a period in which a new chief executive and the American people learn things that cannot emerge in the campaign vortex. The glimpses we get often can be valuable and even prophetic. Before the end of his first 100 days as president, Franklin D. Roosevelt rescued the banking system and won approval of 15 major laws. John F. Kennedy suffered the Bay of Pigs fiasco and Ronald Reagan proposed a sweeping economic program and survived an assassination attempt. Bill Clinton struggled to enact his economic policies and health care reforms amid the chaos created by his swirling personal style and distracting issues like gays in the military. By contrast with the examples above, George W. Bush has had a placid 100 days. Yet as we measure them today, the most striking feature on the domestic front is the emergence of a deep-rooted, unnuanced and sometimes almost truculent conservatism from a man once regarded even by many Republicans as a moderate. As for international relations, Mr. Bush passed his first major test through a combination of caution, luck and a commendable ability to take good advice from a sound foreign-policy team. In his unscripted public performances, Mr. Bush has seemed clumsy and amateurish by the standards of the four presidents mentioned above. But his sunny self-confidence, even his penchant for bankers' hours and long weekends, seems to sit well with many Americans. It is a relief, they seem to be saying, to have a president who is not so tiring and omnipresent as Mr. Clinton. The Inner ConservativeMr. Reagan concentrated so fiercely on cutting government spending and taxes that he was willing to set aside the harsh agenda of the socially conservative members of his so-called base. His aides worked hard to minimize his image as uncaring and disengaged from the problems of working Americans. Mr. Bush seems to feel no such qualms, as he has installed regulatory and economic policies geared toward corporate interests and tax policies designed to comfort the inheriting class. Sometimes there seems something almost Oedipal in Mr. Bush's revitalization of Republican stereotypes, as if by invoking them he can avoid the conservative revolt on taxes that upended his father's presidency. It is not simply that Mr. Bush is pursuing the biggest tax cut since the Reagan era. He is seeking to overturn nearly a generation of advances in the environment, repealing job safety rules and trying to deregulate industry in areas ranging from consumer product safety to monopoly concentration. On abortion, whereas Mr. Reagan's first Supreme Court appointment was the moderate Sandra Day O'Connor, Mr. Bush seems bent on producing a Supreme Court that will overturn Roe v. Wade and lower courts that will enhance states' rights at the expense of federal protections. The one leavening element in his approach has to do with education, where Mr. Bush's call for more federal spending and higher standards embodies an activism and interest eschewed by previous Republican presidents. In a separate area, his troubling proposal to help the poor by providing aid to religious organizations is still being formulated. Although we would be happy to be proved wrong, our conclusion from the record of the first hundred days is that on domestic policy, Mr. Bush will go to the right every chance he gets. Those who want to see more fiscal and social moderation can only hope that someone in the White House, perhaps his political guru Karl Rove, will have a better ear than Mr. Bush for what the public will tolerate in the environmental and regulatory arenas. International RelationsDealing with China provided the most serious foreign-policy tests for Mr. Bush. Over all, he has taken a more careful approach than the one he signaled in his first statement on the downed spy plane and his varying statements last week on the defense of Taiwan. His handling of the spy plane incident and the limitation of arms sales to Taiwan suggest that despite his domestic conservatism, he might in foreign relations follow the tradition of the pragmatic internationalist wing of the Republican Party rather than that of its cold-war-era hawks. His reaching out to allies in the Americas for a trade deal carries the same message. But the issue of how Mr. Bush will handle America's role in the world is far from settled. One situation to watch will be the eventual outcome of the tussles between Secretary of State Colin Powell as the diplomatic moderate and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, who seems inclined to analyze the world in terms of historic or emerging military threats. Right now, Vice President Dick Cheney is perceived as more in Mr. Rumsfeld's camp, and the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, perhaps more in Mr. Powell's. The first couple months of this administration were not very successful for Mr. Powell, whose policies of building a regional consensus against Iraq and continuing engagement with North Korea were all but repudiated after he announced them. But with the successful conclusion of the China episode, we hope that his role is strengthened and that he uses his influence to urge caution about withdrawing troops from Eastern Europe and the Mideast and about going ahead with an untested missile defense system that could start a new arms race. Mr. Rumsfeld has brought a steady hand to Pentagon management and has embarked on a review of military strategy that could make American planners more selective on defense spending and procurement in the future. Our fear is that it could, if mishandled, lead to a costly and destructive military buildup designed to counter the threats that Mr. Rumsfeld perceives, but which could actually turn other countries toward more bellicose policies than they might otherwise embrace. Testing TimeIn January it was a clich to say that expectations were low for Mr. Bush, who lost the popular vote to Vice President Al Gore. Today the general public appears to have moved past the ballot-counting disputes and grown comfortable with Mr. Bush's legitimacy as president. That represents a considerable political accomplishment in only three months. Many citizens seem to like his personality, but at the same time a survey by the Pew Foundation says that he is becoming ''defined more by his policy positions than his personality traits.''This suggests to us that barring a major international crisis, the biggest problems Mr. Bush faces have to do with his outmoded environmental policies and a tax plan that, to borrow one of Mr. Bush's favorite terms, is in itself a form of class warfare. The move to lower acceptable levels of arsenic in drinking water was a ludicrous public-relations blunder on the order of the Reagan administration's declaring ketchup to be a vegetable. But the reversal on carbon dioxide emissions, the humbling of Christie Whitman as administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the threats to Mr. Clinton's forest protection plan, the weakening of the Endangered Species Act and the renouncing of the Kyoto agreement on global warming depict a mindset that is anything but comic. The decision to have Mr. Cheney, a petroleum millionaire, form a national energy policy behind closed doors echoes Mr. Clinton's mistake on health care and also, in our view, misreads the public mood. This country is already safe enough for oil and mining companies. It is the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge that needs protecting. On taxes, the second hundred days will give us a reading on Mr. Bush's real feelings about bipartisanship and his potential as a deal maker with Congress. Until the last couple weeks, for instance, he has demanded that his proposed $1.6 trillion tax cut over 10 years be passed in full. Though he has support for that tax package in the House, he must now decide whether to pare it back enough to win over the moderate Democrats and two independent Republicans whose opposition has blocked Senate approval of the tax cuts at Mr. Bush's figure. Perhaps he is haunted by his father's troubles with the tax issue, but Mr. Bush might already have a politically salable tax cut if he had not followed Mr. Cheney's counsel to play tough with the Senate. It would be smarter politics for Mr. Bush to go with the moderates, accepting a smaller tax cut and more spending for schools. He could then work with the same moderates to skew the cut away from awarding more than 40 percent of its benefits to the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers. Perhaps that is where his heart is, but there are more votes among working-class and middle-class taxpayers who really deserve relief. Style and CharacterAt the level of manners, Mr. Bush has kept his promise to bring ''honor and dignity'' back to the White House. But he needs to declare true independence from Washington's culture of influence peddling by embracing campaign finance reform and by every now and then saying no to the oil, gas and timber industries and the capital's corporate lobbyists. It seems paradoxical to say so, but Mr. Bush seems comfortable in his skin as a person and yet still unsure of himself as an explainer of his presidency. He came to the White House with brief schooling in public affairs, and he is clearly not fully at ease in detailed discussions of his policies. When you parse his sentences, it is still quite striking how many of them turn into verbal collisions. But he would not be the first successful president lacking gifts of articulateness. What concerns us after 100 days is that the nation still has little idea about where Mr. Bush is on the presidential learning curve, how much he has mastered the basic knowledge required for the office. Another lingering question is whether his innate conservatism and an outsized fear of the G.O.P. Congressional bullies will lead him to a crabbed, aggressive style that embraces inclusiveness in words, small gestures and spirit, but not in substance and in delivery of his promised policies to remove the toll booth from the road to the middle class. There are those who say that in terms of overcoming his verbal tics and gaffes, Mr. Bush is as good as he will ever get. But oratory is not everything. We remain optimistic that Mr. Bush will continue in his basically sound approach to foreign policy and trade. And we remain hopeful that he will grow in compassion for average Americans and his sensitivity to the environment.

George W. Bush, who came to the presidency vowing to change the tone of Washington and the policies of his predecessor, has found that Washington has compelled him to change as well, both by moderating his own tone and by accepting compromises on some of his top priorities. Mr. Bush has been widely praised for his administration's discipline, the speed with which he won consensus for what will likely prove to be one of the biggest tax cuts since the Reagan era, and the largely successful way he faced his first foreign challenge, an unexpected confrontation with China. Not surprisingly, Mr. Bush has given himself high marks.''There's less name-calling and finger-pointing,'' he said today in a radio address on the eve of his 100th day in office. ''We're sharing credit. We are learning we can make our points without making enemies.''Yet Mr. Bush is also discovering that presidents must pick their fights with care. Quietly, often denying it along the way, Mr. Bush has been forced because of Congressional opposition to excise school vouchers from his education proposals and shelve the idea of drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, which he once called an essential element of a national energy policy. And in the last few days, after adamantly insisting for so long that $1.6 trillion was ''the right number'' for a tax cut over the next 10 years, he has begun to concede that he will have to settle for a smaller figure.''He knew the moment would come to compromise,'' a top Bush adviser  said the other day. ''It's just come a little faster than some anticipated.''The changes in Mr. Bush's approach are subtle, and his aides insist that he is governing the nation with the same principles and approach he used in governing Texas. His detractors say otherwise; that he has proven far more conservative in the White House than he appeared as a candidate. But even his critics say he is a far more confident leader than he was on Jan. 20, something he demonstrated in Quebec last weekend, when he handled questions on Latin American politics, drugs and trade issues with a degree of subtlety that was missing in his first days in the White House. Yet he has begun to discover, as most presidents do, that the world  looks far more complicated from inside the Oval Office than it did from the campaign trail. Just a year ago he was denouncing the Clinton administration for pouring money into every failing economy around the world; last weekend  he told a journalist from Argentina that he might consider helping prop up her country's troubled economy. A few days later he did exactly that for Turkey. His face-off with China early this month gave him a boost in approval  ratings for defusing a potentially explosive situation, but his comments  since about China and Taiwan, which weaved toward a change of policy and then back again, have shown his continuing unease.''He's still searching for the right tone for talking to the world,'' one senior aide concedes. At home that tone is friendly but studiously unemotive, more Eisenhower than Reagan. But when it comes to courting conservatives who doubted if he was a true believer, it is Mr. Reagan who most comes to mind. Even conservatives say they have been surprised at the degree to which Mr. Bush has sought their views, incorporated their policies and placed them in prominent posts. Like Mr. Reagan, he is a delegator. But Mr. Reagan never made use of the president's father, who was Mr. Reagan's vice president, the way George W. Bush makes use of Vice President Dick Cheney. Because Mr. Cheney is an older, more experienced hand with no presidential ambitions of his own, his behind-the-scenes role appears difficult to overstate. He is running Mr. Bush's energy review and is expected to play an important role in shaping Mr. Bush's thinking on national missile defense, which Mr. Bush will discuss in a speech on Tuesday. And Mr. Cheney  remains the White House's main channel to Congress and the conservative media. Mr. Cheney also plays a role, some aides say, in calming Mr. Bush, who angers more quickly than his father did, especially when the White House wanders from its prepared scripts.''George W. Bush has a little more of his mother in him,'' says Andrew H. Card Jr., the White House chief of staff, who worked in the previous Bush White House. ''Where his father would bite his tongue,'' Mr. Card said, ''every once in a while George W. Bush flaps his tongue. His emotions are a little more visible for those of us who work with him. I know when he's upset. His father masked it. You learn when you're in the doghouse a little earlier now than you did with his dad.''A Premium on CharmMr. Bush went into office believing that likability would count a lot in Washington, just as it did in Texas. For a month, he was right. He handed out nicknames, unveiled a birthday cake for the House minority leader, Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, and invited the Kennedy family over for hamburgers and a viewing of ''Thirteen Days.'' Members of the Black Congressional Caucus, no friend of Republicans, were invited for a grievance session, and Mr. Bush listened intently. In his radio address today, he claimed to be marking ''100 days of Congress and the president working together.''But in the last three months, as introductions have given way to negotiations and negotiations to open conflict, Mr. Bush has discovered that in Washington, good feelings do not translate into legislative majorities. Consider the case of Representative George Miller, a Democrat from California and a senior member of the House committee that oversees education. Mr. Miller backed major elements of the president's education overhaul plan and helped the president show he had allies in both parties. Mr. Bush called him Big George and praised his intellect and bipartisan spirit. The two men seemed genuinely to  hit it off. But listen to Big George now. ''In the first few weeks he did reach out to Democrats,'' Mr. Miller said. ''But we all wondered whether he would keep it up when it was time to get down to business. As it turns out, the White House went off and took a series of unilateral actions that ended any good feelings there may have been. President Bush is very friendly. Many of his policies have been less so.''Today Mr. Miller disparages Mr. Bush's environmental policies and accuses him of underfinancing education. On Monday, when Mr. Bush will offer lunch to all 100 senators and 435 representatives, Mr. Miller and many other Democrats say they have other plans. Was the strategy a failure?''It's not a strategy,'' said Karl Rove, the president's chief political adviser. ''We're not trying to win the afternoon news cycle. We are trying to drain some of the hyperpartisanship out of the system. He will continue to do what he has done.''Mr. Rove knew from the start that chatting up members of Congress  would not be enough, so he came up with a parallel approach: Have the  president visit key states around the country, where he could put maximum pressure on wavering members of Congress. The result has been a blitz of travel. In the first 100 days, Mr. Bush has visited 26 states, what appears to be a modern record for the start of a presidency. Such visits always get big local coverage, as do Mr. Cheney's weekly calls to talk-radio programs. But only occasionally do they get much  national coverage. And there is a  sense among many in Washington that Mr. Bush's presidency seems somehow smaller in the life of the nation. Historians like Michael Beschloss have compared it to the presidencies in the late part of the 19th century, when often the occupant of the White House did not have much to say in public. Mr. Bush says he does not feel compelled to show up on television  ''every hour of every day.'' He was happy to let his attorney general, John Ashcroft, make the public statements about the administration's view of the rioting in Cincinnati after the shooting of a black teenager by the police. Mr. Bush deliberately skipped the homecoming ceremony near Seattle for the 24 United States military personnel detained by the Chinese, saying it was a moment for family reunions, not for a president hogging the limelight. Nor does Mr. Bush put on formal news conferences in the East Room, a favorite setting for past presidents. He prefers quick, impromptu questioning when meeting foreign or Congressional leaders. He has held two news conferences in the press room at very short notice. ''We think that the president is taking as many or more questions than his predecessors did,'' said Karen P. Hughes, one of the inner circle of advisers. ''But it's in his style.'' That style makes it easy, however, to duck queries he does not want to hear, or feels unready to answer. First Up, TaxesMr. Bush's steadfast drive toward his first goal, a big tax cut, dominated his first 100 days in office. It will not be as big as he likes, as he now  acknowledges. But his constant insistence that a large chunk of the surplus should be returned to the American people in the form of deep tax cuts wore down Democrats. Mr. Bush almost crows these days that during the campaign ''a lot of the punditry kind of had a blank stare on their face'' when he talked about tax cuts. ''They thought I was, as they say, whistling into the wind,'' he told an enthusiastic rally at a New Orleans baseball stadium on Wednesday. Now, he said, ''tax relief is on the way.''And despite the administration's repeated warnings of a possible recession, as the first 100 days come to a close, Mr. Bush has some reason to believe that he may have avoided a politically dangerous economic downturn. But if Mr. Bush changed the tone of Washington on taxes, he has failed to win support for his view of how to approach environmental issues: an insistence, born of his business experience in Texas, that any regulation must be carefully weighed against its potential costs. Publicly Mr. Bush's aides insist that the president has been unfairly tarred as anti-environment: He simply wanted ''good science'' to dictate how to change rules on arsenic levels; he was ''realistic'' in declaring the Kyoto treaty on global warming dead. Inside the White House, the regulations President Bill Clinton left on everything from roadless areas in the national forests to workplace ergonomic rules are derisively called ''regulatory pardons.''In backing away from them, Mr. Bush revealed a blind spot in the  administration's political view, one that is evident from polls showing that a growing number of Americans are worried that the president thinks more about his corporate supporters than the environment.''We should have done a better job in setting the stage for the decisions the president made,'' Mr. Card now says. The mistake has left Mr. Bush  retrenching, emphasizing in his radio talk today that he let stand ''sensible rules'' on lead emissions, wetlands, pesticides, and pollution from diesel engines. A Wavering Voice AbroadMr. Bush rarely travels these days without one aide at his side: Condoleezza Rice, the former Stanford provost who, as national security adviser, has taken on the role of tutoring Mr. Bush on the complexities of a broader world he is learning about on the job. But Ms. Rice cannot teach him how to navigate a deep fracture in his own party, between a business community that wants him to focus on economic integration and conservatives who argue that America has been taken for a ride by Russia and China, and needs to flex its muscles as the world's sole superpower. So far, Mr. Bush has bridged this division by sounding both themes. In the China standoff he took a tough line in the first two days, then eased back and talked of the economic damage that bad relations would wreak on both countries. With the crew of the American spy plane out of China, he has veered again, walking to the edge of redefining a willingness to defend Taiwan, then insisting that the policy has not changed. Mr. Bush also had trouble controlling his language on dealing with  North Korea, and angered Europe by giving no warning on his declaration  that the Kyoto treaty would be scrapped. Foreign leaders say they like him but worry about his experience. ''I left wondering whether he had read his briefing papers,'' said one participant in his recent meeting with the president of Chile. While he has met with the leaders of many important friendly countries, including Japan, Germany, Britain, Canada and Mexico, and even made time last week to sip coffee for an hour with the prime minister of St. Kitts (population  39,000), Mr. Bush has yet to sit down with Vladimir V. Putin of Russia or Jiang Zemin of China.

President Bush began paving the diplomatic path today for his missile defense system and the possibility of renouncing the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. He called leaders of several major European and Asian allies in preparation for a speech about missile defense on Tuesday, telling them he wanted to begin consultations on a new nuclear strategy. Mr. Bush is expected to announce a framework for his plans at the National Defense University here. But this afternoon a senior administration official said Mr. Bush would not discuss the budget, schedule or the likely architecture of a new missile defense system.''We need to rethink the concept of deterrence that was in the past based on massive nuclear retaliation,'' the official said. While stopping short of saying the president would abandon the missile treaty, which has been a cornerstone of the arms control world for the last three decades, the official left little doubt that the president was headed in that direction.''At some point in time we will have to pursue promising technologies, and the ABM treaty would likely be in the way,'' the official said. But the official told reporters that Mr. Bush had ''no preconceived notion'' of what kind of system he would like to build, or what nations, beyond the United States, it might protect. Stung by accusations that he abandoned the Kyoto treaty on global warming without warning allies earlier this year, Mr. Bush appeared to go out of his way today to make sure that his fellow leaders were not surprised by what he is to say on Tuesday. This morning he called Chancellor Gerhard Schrder of Germany, Prime Minister Jacques Chirac of France, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, Prime Minister Jean Chrtien of Canada, and the NATO secretary general, Lord Robertson. On Saturday he called the new prime minister of Japan, Junichiro Koizumi, to congratulate him and to say he would be sending a team of senior aides to Asia to begin discussing Japan's role in a related theater missile defense system. Mr. Bush apparently has not yet called Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, who has vociferously opposed a unilateral American decision on missile defense. But Mr. Putin has more recently hinted that in exchange for some American concessions he might be able to live with some amendments to the ABM treaty. But the Russian position is still unclear, and the White House has gone to some length to play down the diplomatic objections to its plans. Mr. Bush has repeatedly said the system is intended to protect against an accidental launch, to repel an attack by states like Iraq or North Korea, or to counter a terrorist threatening nuclear blackmail. But China regards the system as an effort to suppress its own minimum deterrent -- Beijing has deployed roughly 20 nuclear missiles able to reach the United States -- and any hint that the system might also protect Taiwan against a medium-range attack is bound to strengthen China's suspicions that the new administration is trying to contain its military reach. Chinese authorities have threatened to respond by greatly increasing the size of their nuclear arsenal. Unlike the Russians, the Chinese have the cash to make good on that threat.''This spills over directly into China policy, and the new administration's problems with China,'' Senator John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat and a strong critic of Mr. Bush's missile defense plan, said in a telephone interview today from Boston. ''What's the rush? This is essentially a satisfy-your-base, political announcement. It serves no other purpose.''Aides to Mr. Bush say the goal of the speech is to make the case -- as he began to do a year ago during a campaign speech at the National Press Club here -- that the ABM treaty is an outdated relic that does not fit America's current defense needs. His press secretary, Ari Fleischer, said Mr. Bush's speech would ''reflect on his view of the post-cold-war realities,'' and his belief that the ABM treaty was devised for a world in which two hostile superpowers were in an ever escalating race to build more warheads. Mr. Bush has offered to unilaterally reduce America's nuclear arsenal, but it was not known whether he will offer specific numbers in his speech.''Consultation is key,'' Mr. Fleischer said, but he sidestepped questions about whether Mr. Bush was willing to amend his plan if allies objected to central elements of it. The delegation that will be sent to describe Mr. Bush's thinking to American allies, and to Russia, will be led by Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy secretary of defense, and Richard L. Armitage, the deputy secretary of state, officials said.

The Ford Motor Company reaffirmed its concerns about global warming today, but said that it did not support stiffer federal fuel-economy standards or the international Kyoto Protocol on greenhouse gas emissions as ways to address the problem. In its second ''corporate citizenship report,'' Ford said that it had formed a committee of executives to examine ways to reduce the company's contribution to global warming. The report estimated that Ford factories and vehicles around the world emitted about 400 million metric tons of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases a year, or about 2 percent of all emissions caused by people.''On the issue of climate change, there's no doubt that sufficient evidence exists to move from argument to action,'' Jacques Nasser, Ford's chief executive, said in a preamble to the report. Environmental advocates, with whom Ford's leaders have held extensive discussions, said today that they were willing to overlook the automaker's continued reservations about tougher fuel standards and the Kyoto agreement. Instead, they praised Ford for being willing to address the issue of global warming, particularly in light of President Bush's recent disavowal of the Kyoto agreement.''Ford's efforts to be a responsible corporate citizen,'' the Sierra Club said in a statement, ''are in stark contrast with the Bush administration's irresponsible remarks trivializing energy efficiency and President Bush's broken promise on curbing global warming.''The burning of gasoline by automobiles is the second-largest source of carbon dioxide emissions in the United States, after power plants. Many scientists say that the emissions may be causing the earth's atmosphere to become warmer. For its part, Ford is trying to establish an environmentally friendly image in an effort to sell more cars. Today's report highlighted voluntary commitments that it made last summer. The company said that it would increase the average fuel economy of its sport utility vehicles by 25 percent by 2005. It also said that it would start selling a gasoline-electric hybrid version of the Ford Escape sport utility in 2003. General Motors and DaimlerChrysler have since said that they would match Ford by improving the gas mileage of their light trucks, a category that includes pickups and minivans as well as sport utility vehicles. Martin B. Zimmerman, Ford's vice president for governmental affairs, told reporters today that continued research into ways to improve fuel efficiency, like fuel cells, would be more valuable than new government mandates that automakers increase the fuel economy of light trucks.''The way to solve this issue,'' Mr. Zimmerman said, ''is not with small, incremental change.''G.M. and DaimlerChrysler echoed Ford's comments. Dennis Minano, G.M.'s chief environmental officer, said that, in particular,  the automaker opposed increases in the fuel-economy standards for light trucks, which are allowed to burn 33 percent more gasoline per mile than cars. William Clay Ford Jr., the chairman of Ford, was among the first corporate executives to raise the global warming issue, mentioning it in speeches since 1996. Mr. Ford and a few of his aides drafted last year's corporate citizenship report, which attracted national attention with its candid discussion of the safety and environmental drawbacks of sport utilities.

British Banks to Merge In Deal Worth $26 Billion  The Bank of Scotland and the Halifax Group have agreed to merge. The deal, worth about $26 billion, is expected to be announced today. The combined entity would become the fifth-largest bank in Britain and control roughly one-fifth of the mortgage market there and one-third of Scottish banking and have 25 million customers, analysts said. [Page C2. ]Shares Stumble on Economic Data  Data suggesting the economic slowdown might be continuing sent stocks lower. The Dow fell 80.03 points, or 0.7 percent, to 10,796.65. The Nasdaq composite index dropped 74.40 points, or 3.4 percent, to 2,146.20. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index declined 18.85 points, or 1.5 percent, to 1,248.58. [C6. ]IMotors Closes After Investors Flee  IMotors. com, the online seller of used cars that in January hired the former Maytag chief executive Lloyd D. Ward to head its operations, has gone out of business. IMotors had raised about $137 million in financing over the last two years and was on track for $100 million in revenue this year. But when one major investor decided to pull out, the others followed. [C3. ]Fitful Talks Continue in Hollywood  Negotiators for Hollywood's writers and the major movie studios and television networks inched fitfully toward a settlement. [C5. ]Transfer of Reader's Digest Fortune  An agreement to be announced today will dissolve a long-disputed system of gift-giving. In a transfer of charitable riches, 13 institutions will gain control of endowments totaling about $1.7 billion from foundations built on the vast Reader's Digest fortune. [A1. ]Day Trader Settles S.E.C. Charges  A day trader, accused of manipulating the Nasdaq market using a technique called spoofing to force brokers to buy shares at above-market prices, reached a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission. [C6. ]Ford Forms Committee on Emissions  In its second corporate citizenship report, Ford said it had formed a committee to examine ways to reduce its contribution to global warming. But Ford said it did not support stiffer fuel-economy standards or the international Kyoto Protocol on greenhouse gas emissions as ways to address the problem. [C3. ]Bids for Clairol Are Expected  Procter & Gamble and Kao of Japan, which owns Jergens, are expected to submit bids today worth up to $5 billion to Bristol-Myers Squibb to acquire Clairol. [C6. ]Founders of Razorfish Step Down  The founders of Razorfish, Jeffrey A. Dachis and Craig Kanarick, stepped down as the company, which specializes in Web design and consulting, reported a slightly narrower first-quarter loss than expected. The two executives will become co-chairmen of the board and will be replaced by Jean-Phillip Maheu, the chief operating officer. [C2. ]Ruling on Lawsuits Against H.M.O.'s  In a decision that makes it easier for Medicare patients to sue their health maintenance organizations, the California Supreme Court ruled that the widow of an Orange County businessman was entitled to seek compensation under state tort laws. [C4. ]Trucks Acquire a Foreign Flavor  Domestic automakers' iron grip on truck buyers is being pried loose by foreign competitors, which have stolen nearly 10 points of market share in six years, according to the Autodata Corporation. [Automobiles, Section F.]

In a move that reflected a growing frustration with America's attitude toward international organizations and treaties, the United States was voted off the United Nations Human Rights Commission today for the first time since the panel's founding under American leadership in 1947. The ouster of the United States from the commission while nations like Sudan and Pakistan were chosen for membership was certain to generate further hostility to the United Nations among conservatives in Washington. The unexpected move, which came in a secret vote, was apparently supported even by some friends of the United States. The vote also served notice that a bloc of developing nations opposed to American policies is becoming much stronger and more effective, and that Washington can no longer expect to be elected automatically to important panels. Four nations competed today to fill three Western vacancies for three-year terms on the 53-member commission. The secret vote is conducted among the members of the Economic and Social Council, which oversees the Geneva-based commission and is made up of different members than the commission, although there can be some overlap, as there is now.  France had 52 votes out of a possible 54 today, Austria got 41 and Sweden 32. The United States trailed with 29 and was eliminated.''It's an unequivocally devastating blow,'' said William H. Luers, president of the United Nations Association of the United States, the largest American support group for the organization. He said he feared the  effect on a Congress with many critics of the organization.''It couldn't be worse,'' he said. ''All the conservatives in the administration will see this as proof that we are in an organization full of enemies.''Also elected to the commission today were Bahrain, Korea, Pakistan, Croatia, Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Togo and Uganda. One-third of the seats on the commission -- which meets annually to survey human rights practices, pass resolutions critical of abusers and assign monitors -- are open to election every year. President Bush, addressing the American Jewish Committee tonight, made one of his strongest statements yet of the country's defense of human rights and religious freedoms, dwelling on Sudan and China, but did not address the decision on the Human Rights Committee. Amnesty International USA called the removal of the United States from the commission ''part of an effort by nations that routinely violate human rights to escape scrutiny.'' Amnesty accused members of commission of failing to do their job, succumbing instead to political and economic pressures.''The U.S. was among the few nations willing to actively push for condemnation at the U.N.H.R.C. of the brutal human rights violations committed by nations like China,'' it said. At Human Rights Watch, Joanna Weschler, the group's representative at the United Nations, said the commission was becoming ''a rogues' gallery of human rights abusers.'' But she added: ''It wasn't just enemies. It was friends as well who voted the U.S. out of the commission.''Friends of the United States in Europe and elsewhere have grown increasingly impatient, disappointed and annoyed with actions by Washington. And in recent years, critics of the United Nations in Congress have played down American involvement in world organizations generally, rejected a host of treaties and agreements and built up a huge debt in overdue payments to the United Nations budget. More than $580 million of that debt is still tied up in the House of Representatives despite an agreement worked out in December to lower American dues. Then came the Bush administration's rejection of the Kyoto pact to reduce global warming and a decision to develop a missile shield that many other nations saw as a threat to the 1972 antiballistic missile treaty and to arms control in general. Madeleine K. Albright, who was the United States ambassador to the United Nations before becoming secretary of state, said in an interview that it was ''beyond belief'' that at the end of the day Sudan was a member of the commission and the United States was not. Sudan has been accused of a broad array of human rights abuses during its civil war, including slavery.''It's really a bad decision, and it is not only going to harm the ability of the United Nations to function on human rights issues because the United States was the one who was depended upon to introduce some of the resolutions, but I also believe that it will harm the United Nations,'' Dr. Albright said. ''It's one of those things where decisions are made out of some kind of short-term pique or something like that, and it hurts very much at a time when the United Nations needs very much to have American support.''Today, Singapore's ambassador to the United Nations, Kishore Mahbubani, who is currently a member of the Security Council, said it was not American human rights policies that led to this vote, but the overall perception of American inattention to the organization. He said the United States would have to be better at the active campaigning and political horse-trading that other nations employ to gain places on important committees and other bodies. The administration has not yet sent an ambassador to New York. Although John Negroponte, a career diplomat, has been named to the job of United Nations ambassador, his name has not yet been sent to the Senate for confirmation. Representative Nita M. Lowey, the New York Democrat who is co-chairman of the bipartisan United Nations  working group and ranking Democrat on the House foreign operations subcommittee, said in a statement today that what happened was an embarrassment to the United States.''President Bush has dragged his feet in getting key foreign policy officials confirmed,'' she said. ''It is unacceptable that we still have no U.N. ambassador, and this vote is a painful blow to to our global leadership on human rights and democracy. The U.S. commitment to human rights has fallen victim to the administration's laissez-faire attitude toward diplomacy and foreign policy.''The acting United States ambassador to the United Nations, James B. Cunningham, said today that the outcome ''won't, of course, affect our commitment to human rights issues, in and outside the United Nations.''Jean-David Levitte, the French ambassador, attributed the overwhelming vote for France to its policy of approaching human rights issues with cooperation and dialogue rather than confrontation, a system he said worked well with China. France and other European nations did not back an American resolution at the just-concluded six-week annual session of the Human Rights Commission that would have held China up to public criticism. But, Mr. Levitte said, that did not mean that France was prepared to go soft on human rights issues in the commission, where the French often back American moves on other issues. ''We need the U.S. engagement in the U.N., and we need the U.S. in the Human Rights Commission,'' he said. ''My hope is that what happened will not trigger bitter feelings in the U.S. Congress and a new fever against the U.N.''In Washington, Representative Christopher H. Smith, Republican of New Jersey and vice chairman of the House International Relations Committee, who took part in the recent annual commission meeting in Geneva as part of the Bush administration's delegation, said he was ''disappointed but not surprised'' by today's action.''In Geneva, there was a great deal of animosity about the United States bringing the resolution on China,'' he said. ''This seems to me to be a retaliation in part for standing side by side with Israel and standing out on China. This to me is payback for our principled positions.''Mr. Smith backs a Congressional call for American action in voting countries that abuse rights off the commission if the panel's credibility is to survive. Felice Gaer, director of the Jacob Blaustein Institute for the Advancement of Human Rights in New York and a member of the United Nations Committee Against Torture, said the American delegation at this year's Human Rights Commission meeting, did a lot of good in pressing for criticism of countries like China, Iran and Cuba. But when it came to issues like children's rights and the outlawing of ''disappearances,'' the United States took an aggressively negative stand. William vanden Heuvel, a former merican deputy representative at the United Nations who is now chairman of the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute in Hyde Park, N.Y., said today's vote would have ''serious repercussions'' on the Human Rights Commission, which Mrs. Roosevelt helped to create. He said, moreover, that to have all three new Western seats filled by members of the European Union was questionable. But he also said the United States had to face a new reality.''There are so many people in so many countries who are so angry at the United States for not living up to its word,'' he said, after a briefing for ambassadors here before the vote in the Economic and Social Council. ''We're advised too by our representatives how various members of the United Nations are increasingly finding the United States an untrustworthy partner.''

President Bush has said that his forthcoming energy package will be a balanced mix of recommendations aimed at increasing supply and, through improved energy efficiency, lowering demand. But it will be surprising if things actually turn out that way. The main architect of the energy plan is Vice President Dick Cheney, who made clear in a speech last weekend that the plan would focus heavily on increasing supplies of fossil fuels. With the certitude that he brings to most matters, Mr. Cheney contemptuously dismissed those who would look elsewhere to satisfy the country's energy needs. ''Conservation may be a sign of personal virtue,'' he said, ''but it is not a sufficient basis for a sound, comprehensive energy policy.''As Mr. Cheney well knows, there are few people who actually believe that conservation alone can satisfy the country's energy needs. The country's electrical transmission lines need upgrading, there are bottlenecks in the system that distributes natural gas, and there are undoubtedly deposits of natural gas that can be extracted with minimal environmental damage from federal lands that are already open for exploration. But conservation -- saving energy by using it more efficiently -- can also make a huge difference, and for Mr. Cheney to imply otherwise simply reinforces the suspicion that his strategy is little more than a clever effort to sell the country on the need for more drilling. Take first the fuel supply. Mr. Cheney is determined to drill for oil on the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, which could yield as much as 600,000 barrels of economically recoverable oil per day by 2010. By contrast, the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy estimates that gradually raising the fuel efficiency of light trucks and cars to 35 miles per gallon would save 1.5 million barrels a day in 2010 and 4.5 million barrels a day by 2020 -- up to seven times what the refuge could produce. Moreover, these would be permanent energy savings that would not require invading an ecological treasure. Improved energy efficiency would also diminish the need for new power plants. In the same speech, Mr. Cheney asserted that energy demands are rising so fast that the country will need to build 1,300 new generating plants in the next 20 years. This assertion was based on a report of questionable integrity from the Energy Information Administration, an arm of the Energy Department that  has traditionally promoted conventional energy sources like coal and oil and downplayed the potential of efficiency and renewable energy. It is also the same report that Mr. Bush used to justify his decision to withdraw from the Kyoto accords on global warming. Meanwhile, the administration has conveniently ignored another Energy Department study published late last year -- ''Scenarios for a Clean Energy Future,'' compiled by scientists at some of the Energy Department's national laboratories.  The study argued that efficiency measures alone could obviate the need for building 610 of the 1,300 plants. For example, constructing buildings that were more energy efficient would eliminate the need for 100 plants, while rules approved near the end of the Clinton administration mandating more efficient appliances -- air-conditioners, clothes dryers and water heaters -- would save an additional 180 plants. Increased energy efficiency could even rescue the president from the folly of punching holes in the Arctic, drilling off the coast of Florida and invading the national forests along the Rocky Mountain Front. But the key Bush officials do not see the potential in conservation. In its budget, the administration actually proposed a 30 percent cut in funding for a government-auto industry partnership that is seeking to develop a new generation of energy-efficient vehicles. That partnership, an Al Gore favorite that Detroit also loves, is helping to speed development of hybrid cars that get up to 60 miles per gallon. The White House has also threatened to weaken the new standards for central air-conditioners, while the Energy Department proposes to cut in half its spending on alternative fuel sources like wind, solar energy and fuel cells. The budget holds out the hope that these research funds will be restored in 2004 -- but only with money earned from oil leases in the Arctic refuge should Congress allow drilling there. There can be no plainer illustration of the bias toward extraction that defines what we know so far about Mr. Cheney's energy strategy.

Administration and congressional officials  expressed anger today at the United Nations for the loss of a United States seat on the Human Rights Commission, and influential Republicans and Democrats in the House  threatened to hold $244 million in dues to the organization if Washington's seat is not restored next year. In a telephone interview this evening, shortly after the House deal  was reached, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell acknowledged that American officials had been taken by surprise by members of the United Nations Economic and Social Council who voted the United States off the panel in a secret ballot last week. ''One thing I can guarantee you is that we will be back on it next year,'' General Powell said today. He said that the vote, combined with another secret ballot that resulted in the loss of the American seat on the International Narcotics Control Board, reflected the fact that ''we left a little blood on the floor'' in votes involving the Palestinians, Cuba and China, and that a number of countries were looking to retaliate. General Powell spoke as the Administration was both venting its anger over the committee seats and attempting to head off a movement in Congress to cut off American funding for the United Nations. In the last days of the Clinton administration, the United States agreed to pay more than a billion dollars in back dues. Today, Democratic and Republican leaders of the House International Affairs Committee agreed to go ahead with the next United Nations dues payment of $582 million. But in an effort by Republicans to calm conservatives who are demanding a cutoff of money to the United Nations, an accord was reached in which a later payment of roughly $244 million would be withheld unless the United States is reinstated. The next election for slots on the Human Rights Commission is in spring 2002. Representative Dick Armey, the House majority leader, predicted that when the House took up a bill later this week on State Department programs it would vote to restrict the repayment of some of the dues.  ''This is an affront,'' he said, ''more to the whole notion of international human rights than it is to us as a nation.''General Powell did not say whether he thought withholding dues might  further inflame relations between the United Nations and Washington. ''We have to look at the language,'' he said. General Powell, in a telephone call he made to The New York Times, said a number of countries were seeking to dilute American influence at the United Nations. ''As one of my colleagues here said, this was a vote looking for a venue to happen,'' he said. The ratcheting up of pressure on the United Nations began today at the White House, where Mr. Bush's spokesman, Air Fleischer, blamed the countries that had reneged on promises to the United States to vote for American seats on both panels.''It's hard to be committed to the cause of human rights when you've put Sudan and Libya on a panel that's dedicated to fighting for the cause of human rights,'' he said in a briefing. ''The real losers in this equation are people around the world who are struggling to be free.''But in private, some American officials acknowledged that they had failed to detect a sea change in the 54-member Economic and Social Council, which selects the members of the human rights and drug commissions. China had quietly lobbied to get the United States removed, striking back for the annual resolution that Washington sponsors condemning Beijing's treatment of dissidents and, this year, the Falun Gong movement. Other developing nations joined. Europe's vote was split: Three European countries and the United States were vying for three slots. France received 52 votes, Austria 41, and Sweden 32. The United States came in fourth, with 29, losing the seat it has held since Eleanor Roosevelt helped establish the commission. Some American officials say the seat might have been saved if the American nominee for ambassador to the United Nations, John Negroponte, had been confirmed by the Senate and in place. Others say that the Bush administration had relied too heavily on the 43 promises from other nations that they would vote to keep the United States on the panel. Such vows are regularly broken. Tonight General Powell said he was ''reviewing the vote to see if we were not anticipating things right.'' But he declined to release a list of the countries, 14 of which voted for other nations. ''I think that would just complicate our relations with those countries,'' he said. He also defended the diplomat temporarily running the United States mission at the United Nations, James Cunningham. ''He's no rookie,'' General Powell said. ''We just have to take our hit and move on.''The loss of the seat on the Human Rights Commission has a practical effect: The United States cannot sponsor resolutions within the group, like the resolutions it offered up earlier this year condemning China and Cuba for their human rights violations. The China resolution failed; the Cuba resolution passed. Now at least for the next year, those countries do not have to worry about dealing directly with the Bush administration. If the United States wants to renew those resolutions next year, it must find another country on the committee to act as the main sponsor, and the United States will not be able to vote. The loss of the seat on the International Narcotics Control Board has a less dramatic effect. The 13-member board monitors compliance with United Nations' drug conventions on trafficking and substance abuse, but has little real power. Herbert Okun, the American representative for the past decade, was voted off the panel. Iran, Brazil, Peru, India, the Netherlands, France and Austria were elected to the board. General Powell said tonight that ''A lot of this has to do with the aggressiveness with which we have pressed our human rights agenda.'' But he said ''we will continue to show that aggressiveness this year.''Harder to measure, however, is whether the vote was also a reflection of mounting resentment over  America's role as the world's sole superpower, and the Bush administration's suggestions that it would walk away from the Kyoto treaty on global warming and eventually replace the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. When the United Nations vote took place on Thursday, Congress was just going out of session for the weekend, so the reaction was delayed. But when it reconvened today, the anger at the United Nations was not limited to its conservative critics. Representative Tom Lantos of California, the ranking Democrat on the House International Affairs committee, reached the accord on back dues with Henry J. Hyde, the Republican chairman of the committee.  ''The vote to exclude the U.S. from the U.N.H.R.C. last week was outrageous and only damaged the institution and undermined the cause of human rights worldwide,'' he said. But he added, ''We should not compound the damage by withholding the bulk of our arrears payments to the United Nations.''Correction:  May 10, 2001, Thursday  A front-page article yesterday about a threat by members of the House of Representatives to withhold dues to the United Nations misstated the given name of the White House spokesman. He is Ari Fleischer, not Air. Correction: May 10, 2001, ThursdayA front-page article yesterday about a threat by members of the House of Representatives to withhold dues to the United Nations misstated the given name of the White House spokesman. He is Ari Fleischer, not Air.<br><br>

OVER the last decade, as the United States looked down from the peak of world power, its officials may have overlooked some currents rising below. While the demise of the Soviet system left only one superpower standing, it also freed scores of other nations from the gridlock of East-West confrontation, and they began to build new or stronger alliances outside Washington's reach. In the developing world, a bloc known as the G77 that now includes 133 African, Asian and Latin American countries can command a two-thirds majority in the United Nations. Across the Atlantic, the European Union has 15 members and will grow more. Diplomats and American officials say it was these two groups, not normally allies, that came together for one startling moment to jolt the United States in the last week and a half, snatching away American seats on the United Nations Human Rights Commission and the International Narcotics Control Board in a secret vote in the Economic and Social Council. The event symbolized a much larger phenomenon: the evolution of a whole new set of relationships between the United States and two emerging power blocs with strong interests of their own that may frequently come in conflict with American interests. Most of the world's nations may now be democratic to one degree or another, but that does not unite them. The challenge is to learn how to manage the differences and to separate the truly crucial ones -- over economic needs, peace, the environment, for example -- from irritants. In this light, the sabotaging of American membership on the Human Rights Commission -- apparently an act of cumulative annoyance after years of American rejection of international agreements, the hounding from office of Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and Congressional  blocking of dues that beggared the United Nations -- looks like overkill to many Americans. But it has also sounded an alarm.''This is one of those seminal events -- like Zionism equals racism -- that is going to haunt us for a long time,'' said Richard N. Gardner, a Columbia University law professor who was in last year's American delegation to the General Assembly. The fear is  that poisoned feelings on all sides could make it more difficult, as Israel-bashing did in the 1970's, for the United States to work  with the United Nations on critical matters, like containing Iraq, for which Americans have needed the United Nations in the past. The House of Representatives did strike back last week, voting to withhold $244 million in overdue payments to the United Nations, but paying a $582 million bill. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, President Ronald Reagan's United Nations ambassador and a frequent critic of the organization, nevertheless thinks Congress aimed at the wrong target. ''Kofi Annan didn't cause our problems, and the U.N. secretariat didn't cause our problems,'' she said in an interview. ''Withholding funds from the U.N., we don't really affect the people whom we would like to affect.'' Those responsible, she said, were the Europeans, who didn't relinquish a seat to America when there were four candidates for three slots on the Human Rights Commission, and apparently voted as a bloc for Austria, France and Sweden. Since the end of the cold war, Dr. Kirkpatrick said, one of the most important changes in the world has been the consolidation of the European Union, and ''with that has gone an increased influence of France, with its characteristic exclusiveness.''Among the developing nations, an Asian ambassador said, votes were cast against the United States for several reasons, including what many see as a paucity of American aid and opposition to American efforts to hold individual countries up to human-rights scrutiny, in particular China. Arthur C. I. Mbanefo, Nigeria's ambassador and last year's chairman of the G77. said poor countries were only flexing muscles in their national interests as Americans do. Concerted attacks on the United States are, of course, nothing new in international bodies, but rarely have such strong efforts been made to exclude Americans from what they have come to consider their rightful place at a lot of tables. In some ways, the global advance of democracy is part of the problem. In many more nations, public opinion matters, and television audiences can see -- and resent -- how their presidents are treated on visits to Washington or how Americans rank their concerns. So even if many countries now share an interest in advancing democratic  principles, one Asian ambassador said, ''no one has said we must vote for each other'' when interests clash. At Freedom House in New York, the president, Adrian Karatnycky, differed, saying it should be possible to build coalitions based on political and civil liberties and adding that there is a danger when ''a bunch of countries are playing with these rather sacrosanct values to make other kinds of extraneous points.'' He dismissed European explanations that the Bush administration's rejection of the Kyoto treaty on global warming was reason enough to punish the United States. ''If you link the Kyoto treaty to human rights, you're doing it to the detriment of both,'' he said. MR. GARDNER and some foreign diplomats fault the American  mission here for inept handling of the campaign for the Human Rights Commission seat. But Bill Richardson, chairman of Freedom House's board and a Clinton-era ambassador to the United Nations, pointed in an interview to other issues. He recommended courting the developing bloc, ''perhaps by renewing our efforts to expand the Security Council to include them, and build coalitions'' among its members when their interests clash with Europe's, as on trade and immigration. In any event, he and other former American ambassadors to the United Nations seem in agreement that the worst message to send would be a threat of blackmail, as in the congressional demand that the United States be re-elected to the Human Rights Commission before final bills are paid. ''It gives another tool to those who deprived us of the seat,'' Mr. Richardson said.

Despite the Bush administration's decision to back away from regulating emissions of global- warming gases, many multinational companies plan to continue reducing such emissions because they face strong pressure to do so in Europe and Japan, fear rising energy costs or want to promote their products as being friendly to the environment. Some of the executives with plans to reduce emissions say they are trying to be good corporate citizens. But companies also cite a wide range of business reasons that have little to do either with the environment or with what happens in Washington. And even as they move ahead on their own, some top officials at these companies say that while voluntary action is the right approach in the short run, at some point they expect the United States and others to adopt binding restrictions on the gases.''Eventually, you're going to have to have a hard cap of some kind,'' said E. Linn Draper Jr., chairman and chief executive of American Electric Power, which owns coal-fired power plants across the Midwest and builds power projects overseas. Because of the many steps being taken, emissions of global-warming gases by American industry are in fact falling, and at a surprising rate. The big increases these days come more from decisions made by consumers than corporations, as emissions from autos and homes continue to rise with people driving farther each year, buying less-fuel-efficient vehicles and building ever-larger houses with more appliances. The shift in thinking at big companies is so marked that some executives who once led the fight against restrictions on the heat-trapping gases are now advocating action. Peter J. Pestillo, chairman and chief executive of the Visteon Corporation, one of the world's largest auto parts makers, said many companies had discovered that efforts to address climate and other environmental matters not only had marketing value but could often be addressed at a modest cost, provided the problems were identified early in the planning of each new project.''People aren't debating global warming any more,'' Mr. Pestillo said. ''It is more to take a high ground where you will be one day, rather than be driven to it.''Mr. Pestillo's views are significant because as a top executive at Ford in the 1990's, he used to coordinate the auto industry's opposition to many environmental rules. In industry after industry, steps like these are being taken that have the effect of reducing global-warming emissions:*Every large automaker is investing heavily in new engine technologies to improve fuel economy, partly because the burning of gasoline in cars and trucks is one of the largest and fastest-growing sources of carbon dioxide, the main global-warming gas, and because gasoline prices are rising and regulators in Europe and Japan are demanding major improvements in fuel economy.*European-based oil giants like Shell and BP are taking steps to end the burning off of natural gas at oil wells -- both to mollify environmentalists in their home markets and in hopes of selling the gas and gaining a competitive advantage by acquiring a greener image. American producers like Exxon Mobil are starting to move in the same direction.*Companies like DuPont are lowering their output of certain chemicals that contribute to global warming, an action begun years ago because some of the same chemicals damage the ozone layer.*Some big manufacturers like Alcoa, which release other heat-trapping gases, have been shifting to less polluting methods, partly to address the climate issue but also because cost-effective improvements in industrial processes reduce heat-trapping emissions.*Electric utilities are trying to reduce the amount of energy wasted by their power plants, so they can burn less fuel as well as head off government regulations. The corporate moves to reduce emissions of global-warming gases add up, some environmental groups say, to a significant shift in approach.''Many companies figured out in the 1990's that if an environmental issue reaches a certain level of public consciousness and seriousness, it's better to be proactive than reactive,'' said Philip E. Clapp, president of the National Environmental Trust, a private Washington group that has been lobbying to salvage the Kyoto Protocol, the proposed climate agreement that was rejected by President Bush two months ago. ''You're then seen as a leader and get to be at the table framing all the rules.''But Mr. Clapp and many other environmental campaigners maintain that only government action to restrict warming gases will ultimately be sufficient to spur adequate changes. Some business executives oppose binding restrictions on greenhouse gases but say that government must still play a role by establishing rules and methods -- for example, a trading arrangement for credits earned by cutting emissions. This is what they are seeking from the Bush administration, which has been hearing from scientists, economists and industries as it ponders a counterproposal to the Kyoto agreement.''There can't be an entirely free-market approach,'' said Norine Kennedy, vice president for environmental affairs of the United States Council for International Business, which represents about 300 American companies doing business overseas. White House officials, for the moment, decline to say how the administration will deal with the contentious issue. ''The president has pledged to review the full range of options'' on dealing with climate change, a White House spokesman, Ken Lisaius, said. ''He will be continuing to reach out to a wide range of groups and soliciting a diversity of views on the matter.''Yet many corporations say that by taking some voluntary steps now, they hope to head off regulations that could be much more stringent. Dennis Minano, vice president for energy and the environment at General Motors, said that even as G.M. tried to improve fuel economy, it continued to oppose all federal fuel-economy standards. The company welcomed Mr. Bush's decision to withdraw American support for the Kyoto agreement, which would require industrial nations to reduce emissions of the warming gases. Overall emissions of global-warming gases in the United States climbed 0.9 percent in 1999 compared with 1998, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. Industrial emissions in fact fell that year, by 2.1 percent. Commercial emissions -- mainly from electric utilities that supply stores and other businesses -- rose 1.9 percent. But residential emissions were up 2.9 percent, also reflecting the increased use of electric power. Global-warming emissions from transportation, primarily from the burning of gasoline in automobiles and diesel fuel in trucks, grew 3.4 percent in 1999. Auto executives are working on their own to reduce emissions amid popular dismay in Japan and particularly in Europe, where there has been much more public interest than in this country on global warming. Japanese regulators have ordered automakers to improve average gas mileage to 35.5 miles a gallon in 2010, from 30.3 now. Automakers with operations in Europe, including Ford and G.M., have reluctantly agreed to increase fuel economy there to 41 miles a gallon from 33 miles now. Both of these standards go well beyond those now in the United States, which require new cars to average 27.5 miles a gallon and light trucks, like pickups and sport utility vehicles, to achieve 20.7 miles. Some American auto executives say they are coming under pressure from European managers within their companies who want them to tone down their criticism of the Kyoto agreement to avoid antagonizing prospective buyers there. Detroit's leading automakers -- DaimlerChrysler, in addition to G.M. and Ford -- have each announced plans to increase the gas mileage of light trucks, especially sport utility vehicles, but oppose any toughening of federal standards. Big gains in fuel economy are possible in Europe because most drivers there prefer smaller vehicles and because of the growing use in cars of diesel engines, which will be virtually banned in the United States in 2004 by air pollution rules. In Japan, vehicles increasingly use an engine valve technology that improves fuel efficiency but tends to restrict acceleration. Toyota, which has factories in Asia, Europe and North America, plans to reduce the energy needed to manufacture a vehicle 15 percent by 2005, after years in which energy use has been flat. Toyota has already taken lots of little steps, like turning off the lights in factories between shifts, and installing computer-controlled thermostats throughout the plants to fine-tune the level of air-conditioning needed. The complex mixture of corporate motives is illustrated by the pledge of Royal Dutch/Shell to stop burning off natural gas at oil fields by 2008. Natural gas often comes out of the ground with oil, but it is expensive to build pipelines or construct factories to liquefy and ship it. Shell is working harder to sell the gas now anyway. Expecting industrial nations to impose some kind of restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions, Shell has modified its accounting of the costs and benefits of future projects in these countries. In deciding which projects to carry forward, the company has begun including a $5 penalty for each ton of carbon dioxide that will be emitted in these countries from 2005 to 2009, and a $20-a-ton penalty thereafter. Including this accounting device will give the decision-making process a bias toward more efficient projects, Shell says. The split among electric power producers, which are responsible for about a third of the country's carbon dioxide emissions, tends to reflect their views of how long they will be allowed to operate without further restrictions. Some companies that rely mainly on coal, the fuel that produces the most carbon dioxide, have expressed doubt that global warming is a problem. But despite that, a few of these companies have joined with government agencies in programs aimed at voluntarily reducing greenhouse gas releases. Other utilities, including American Electric Power, have accepted the idea that government limits on carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are inevitable. It is the seeming inevitability of such emissions limits that prompted some utilities to support legislation cutting carbon dioxide emissions from power plants as part of a broader cleanup of factory pollution. This idea gained momentum when Mr. Bush, as a presidential candidate, pledged that he would seek mandatory cuts in carbon dioxide from the plants. But the momentum died in March, when Mr. Bush abandoned that pledge and rejected the Kyoto accord. Some of the same utilities are lobbying the White House to come up with a concrete plan to cut greenhouse gas emissions that can be presented as an alternative to the Kyoto agreement. Executives say their goal is to save money in the long term by establishing clear rules early. In heavy manufacturing, one leader in addressing climate change has been Dupont, which by last year had reduced emissions of greenhouse gases from its factories worldwide more than 50 percent below levels of 1990. This came mainly through changing the way that DuPont makes nylon, a process that once produced enormous emissions of nitrous oxide -- a gas that, molecule for molecule, is 300 times as potent as carbon dioxide in trapping heat in the atmosphere. By 2010, company officials say, their goal is to reduce greenhouse gas releases to 65 percent below 1990 levels. Executives in other businesses also say there is the potential for major improvements, not just slow progress. The aluminum industry is testing new smelting processes that if widely adopted, could greatly cut releases of both carbon dioxide and perfluorocarbons, another group of potent warming gases. Alcoa, which until recently was run by Paul H. O'Neill, now secretary of the Treasury, announced plans last month to reduce its greenhouse emissions by 2010 to levels 25 percent below those in 1990. If its tests of a new smelting method succeed, the company said, it could double that, achieving a 50 percent cut within a decade. Many power company officials say they are also ready to help pay farmers, here and abroad, to sop up carbon dioxide, which would be far cheaper than upgrading existing power plants to produce less greenhouse pollution. G.M. is helping the Nature Conservancy buy 30,000 acres of Atlantic coastal rain forest in Brazil, which are to be preserved to absorb carbon dioxide and protect wildlife. Thomas C. Jorling, vice president for environmental affairs of the International Paper Company, said government officials had identified 65 million acres of degraded pasture or cropland that could be planted with trees, and in so doing pull millions of tons of carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. The company is in discussions with manufacturers that are big emitters of greenhouse gases over ways to share the costs, and greenhouse credits, of such an effort. But first the government must establish the rules to ensure the fairness and effectiveness of this kind of deal, he said. ''Bush can still come out of this as a very positive force,'' Mr. Jorling said.

President Bush's long-awaited energy plan proposes loosening regulations on oil and gas exploration, conservation-minded efforts like a review of gas mileage standards and a $4 billion tax credit for a new generation of highly fuel efficient cars, and urges a reconsideration of a quarter-century ban on the reprocessing of nuclear fuel. With a declaration that the energy problems threaten the nation's economy and security, the Bush plan also orders a sweeping review of public lands to determine whether more energy resources can be extracted.''America in the year 2001 faces the most serious energy shortage since the oil embargoes of the 1970's,'' the administration's energy report states. Without action, it continues, projected energy shortfalls in coming years ''will inevitably undermine our economy, our standard of living and our national security.'' [Excerpts, Page A21. ]The proposals are among 105 initiatives outlined in the administration's energy report, said a senior government official who briefed reporters on its contents tonight. The White House released an eight-page overview of the document, which will be distributed in full on Thursday. The official said Mr. Bush would also issue two executive orders later this week directing all federal agencies to consider the effects of all new regulations on energy production and to expedite permits for all energy projects ''while remaining mindful of protecting the environment.''The overview released tonight states that federal regulation of the nation's energy producers has unduly inhibited production and increased prices.''Regulation is needed in such a complex field, but it has become overly burdensome,'' the report says. ''Regulatory hurdles, delays in issuing permits and economic uncertainty are limiting investment in new facilities, making our energy markets more vulnerable to transmission bottlenecks, price spikes and supply disruptions.''Mr. Bush will also order Interior Secretary Gale A. Norton, an outspoken proponent of seeking new sources of energy on federal lands, to ''look at any impediments'' that discourage exploration for oil and gas. The report repeats Mr. Bush's commitment to explore in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge -- a proposal that seems unlikely to survive in Congress -- and also urges a review that will include other places in Alaska, the Rocky Mountains and along the Gulf Coast. The report also urges the revision or reinterpretation of a major clause of the Clean Air Act that requires long government review of any modifications of power plants that affect their emissions. The senior government official, who was deeply involved in the development of the plan, argued tonight that the ''new source reviews''  by the Environmental Protection Agency are a ''time-consuming process'' that often ''discourage fuel efficiency.''The Justice Department will also be ordered to review several multi-million-dollar lawsuits brought by the Clinton administration against utilities accused of ignoring the law. One official of an environmental group said the report was about what he had expected, and he predicted that conservation organizations would be highly critical of it.''This has just a lot of opportunity for mischief from the energy producers and no real solid commitments for the green components,'' the official, David G. Hawkins, senior lawyer for the Natural Resources Defense Council, said. Mr. Hawkins said he was ''astounded'' that the policy would recommend a review of legal actions now under way on utility emissions, calling it ''political interference with law enforcement.''Mr. Bush is to announce his plan on Thursday morning at an innovative energy plant in St. Paul. But even before he begins his campaign for a national energy policy, he has touched off a heated political argument between Democrats and Republicans over how to balance environmental concerns against growing energy needs, and whether to impose temporary price caps in places like California, where a deregulation program and soaring demand has sent prices rocketing. Democrats have urged the use of such controls, while Mr. Bush will argue ''vociferously'' on Thursday, one aide said, that the controls would only discourage the production of more electricity. Mr. Bush's report adopts a tone that is by turns admonishing and encouraging.''The complacency of the past decade must now give way to swift, but well-considered, action,'' it says in its introduction, echoing themes that Mr. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney, who headed the task force, have sounded in recent weeks.''Present trends are not encouraging, but they are not immutable,'' the report says. Then, in a clear effort to separate Mr. Bush's approach from President Jimmy Carter's politically disastrous calls for household austerity during the energy crises of the late 1970's, it adds: ''Our country has met many great tests. Some have imposed extreme hardship and sacrifice. Others have demanded only resolve, ingenuity and clarity of purpose. Such is the case with energy today.''The decision to offer a relatively hefty tax credit for ''hybrid'' cars, which use a combination of gasoline and battery power, is bound to help both Detroit and two Japanese automakers -- Honda and Toyota -- which are already marketing such vehicles in the United States. They will be less enthusiastic, however, about orders by Mr. Bush for the government to review the federal standards for automotive fuel efficiency, though the report makes no commitment that those standards will be raised. The plan also calls for a new evaluation of nuclear reprocessing, a technology that takes advantage of the fact that as reactors consume uranium, they also produce plutonium. If the plutonium is chemically scavenged from the fuel, it can be used to run reactors. But the technology has drawbacks. The work is dirty, with the threat of radioactive releases, and it is expensive. For the last decade at least, it has been far cheaper to fuel reactors with new uranium than to recover plutonium. And while uranium fuel used in power reactors cannot be used to make a bomb, plutonium can, raising the threat of world commerce in a material that could be diverted by countries -- or terrorist groups -- that want a bomb. Britain, France and Japan currently reprocess fuel, although the British are considering ending the practice because it is so expensive. But reprocessing can reduce the volume of plutonium requiring disposal, which is important because plutonium is so long-lived and difficult to store safely. Some opponents of the technology said today that they believed it had been included in the Bush plan as a sop to Nevada, where the Energy Department is trying to build a waste repository. But reprocessing would not eliminate the need for such a repository. The plan also calls for cooperation with Canada on building a pipeline that could bring more natural gas into the United States. The report mixes several existing initiatives with new ones, particularly in the area of conservation. For example, of $10 billion in proposed tax credits over the next 10 years, $5 billion in credits are already in the budget or the result of extending existing ones. Other programs get modest increases. The administration recommends $300 million in new money for the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program and calls for funneling some oil and gas royalty payments, which companies pay the federal government for extracting resources on public land, to the program for the poor. Similarly, in an effort directed toward environmentalists, it would commit royalties from any energy extracted in the Arctic National Wildlife Reserve for land conservation. There are no credits or other tax breaks for oil or gas producers, or electric utilities -- a reflection of the sensitivity of the White House to criticism that Mr. Cheney and other top officials spent their private-sector years in the energy industry. But the tone of deregulation, reassessment of the merits of the Clean Air Act and the emphasis on opening of federal lands to more energy production -- everything from wind power to oil and gas drilling -- provides those industries with effective subsidies totaling in the billions of dollars. Much of the report simply urges companies to build, build and build some more, including 38,000 miles of new gas pipelines, 255,000 miles of distribution pipelines and a new power plant every few days for the next 20 years. But for every such proposal, Mr. Bush's team carefully inserted proposals for expanding the use of renewable fuels, from geo-thermal energy sources to the methane produced in landfills. The nuclear power industry gets one major concession: a tax break that would eliminate the double taxation of money put aside for decommissioning plants. Those taxes have been a deterrent to buying and selling nuclear plants. It commits $2 billion over 10 years to a clean-coal technology program in the Department of Energy. It urges the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to speed the licensing of hydroelectric power plants, and seeks ''market-based incentives'' to reduce pollutants that cause global climate change. But this winter Mr. Bush rejected any American participation in the Kyoto treaty on global warming, which would have mandated cuts in American emissions, at considerable economic cost.

To sign his executive orders speeding federal approval of energy projects around the country, President Bush came to a Depression-era hydroelectric station today that stretches across the Susquehanna River and marveled at the ''fish lift'' that now enables shad to take an elevator ride over the huge dam to their spawning grounds. The backdrop was carefully chosen, the latest of several settings that cast Mr. Bush in the role of the compassionate conservationist. For the past two days, at energy plants in Minnesota, Iowa and here, Mr. Bush has acted like a man certain of his green credentials -- and a bit surprised that not everyone shares his confidence that American ingenuity will allow the country to drill in an Arctic refuge, build 1,300 power plants, keep driving sport utility vehicles and barely nick on the environment.''I firmly believe we can solve this problem,'' Mr. Bush said today. ''I know we can't solve it without a plan, and that's why I've laid one out.''But in laying it out, Mr. Bush has weighted his public remarks on his commitment to conservation, rather than the details of how to increase  the energy supply that lie at the core of the 163-page report outlining his strategy. Without question, he found it easier to make an optimistic case here than he would have exactly 28 miles upstream. There, just above the Safe Harbor Dam that he visited today, the four cooling towers of the Three Mile Island nuclear plant loom over the river, site of the accident 22 years ago that came to define a generation's understanding of environmental risk. Mr. Bush never mentioned that accident today. He came close once, telling his small but enthusiastic audience that ''nuclear power is much safer than it's ever been,'' his way into an argument that the long moratorium on building new nuclear plants must now end. Not once in the past two days has he publicly mentioned another key recommendation in his report: to re-evaluate an American ban on breeder reactors and the reprocessing of nuclear fuel, a once-promising technology that was abandoned in the Carter administration as too risky and too likely to let separated plutonium slip into the hands of terrorists. There is little doubt that Mr. Bush speaks from the heart when he insists that the United States should not be forced into what he calls a ''false choice'' between energy production and environmental conservation. His love of the outdoors is obvious. He tells friends he lives for his moments at his ranch in Texas, where the Brazos River cuts through his land, and he escapes to Camp David on almost any weekend when a trip back home seems too difficult. But in January, Mr. Bush also told two visitors to his ranch that ''I understand the Western mentality, and I want the Western mentality represented in this administration.''''It's part of that big swath of red on the map,'' he said, referring to the states he swept in the November presidential election. In that conversation, Mr. Bush remarked somewhat dismissively about his opponent for president, Al Gore, characterizing his view as ''we will conserve our way out of the crisis.''This week, Mr. Bush has modified that message. Perhaps mindful of the polls that show many Americans worrying that his administration is too attuned to the desires of the oil and gas industries from which several cabinet members have sprung, he has waxed on about the wonders of renewable energy. Thursday, it was a plant that burns wood chips and turkey waste, and a biomass plant that burns agricultural byproducts. Today, it was the shad-friendly hydroelectric dam.''I hope some day that these renewables will be the dominant source of energy in America,'' Mr. Bush said, adding, ''I'm not so sure how realistic that is.''Even his drive to clear away the bureaucratic hurdles to new energy plants has been hedged with assurances that he is not about to sacrifice the environment. He simply wants to balance the cost-benefit equation, he suggested today when he signed an executive order requiring federal agencies to issue an ''energy impact statement'' along with the long-required ''environmental impact statement.'' And he said that whenever his administration searched for new places to drill, he would be ''mindful of the environment.''But he carefully sidestepped imposing standards that industry must meet, notably standards for greenhouse gas emissions. Environmental groups leaped on that decision.''Climate is the elephant in the middle of the living room that the authors of the report didn't want to talk about,'' said Joseph Goffman, the senior lawyer at Environmental Defense, a research and lobbying group that was highly critical of Mr. Bush's decision to declare the Kyoto treaty on global warming dead. ''There is nothing in there that would require the integration of policies to bring down greenhouse gas emissions.''Mr. Bush's other political calculation is to make clear that he is asking for no sacrifice from consumers. He talked today about his enthusiasm for more fuel-efficient cars, and his report calls for a $4 billion tax credit for consumers who buy a new generation of hybrids, which combine gas and electricity, and charge their batteries from the energy lost when drivers hit the brakes. But he never made reference to the American love affair with sport utility vehicles. A report released last month by the Council on Foreign Relations, and presented to Vice President Dick Cheney's task force, noted that if the fuel efficiency requirements for sport utility vehicles matched that of cars, the savings would amount to 225,000 barrels of oil a day. If the requirements were applied to all light trucks, the savings would amount to over 900,000 barrels a day, or 50 percent more than Mr. Bush would extract from the Arctic National Wildlife Reserve. Asked about sport utility vehicles on Thursday, Mr. Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer, noted that the House minority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, also seemed unconcerned about the symbolism of the gas-guzzlers when arriving at an event to release a Democratic energy plan.''The president thought the fact that Dick Gephardt was driven to his news conference in an S.U.V. should not be used against him,'' Mr. Fleischer said. THE ENERGY PLAN: THE ENERGY PLAN

SOME people are just fair game for being picked on and put down: lawyers, politicians, journalists, mothers-in-law and, now, bullies. These days, everybody is ganging up on bullies, blaming them for all that ails us. Bullies and their taunting, arrogant ways are said to have been the driving force behind the student shootings at Columbine and Santana High Schools. Young bullies supposedly grow into sociopaths, angry drunks, wife abusers or maybe mayors of major East Coast cities. The victims of bullying are portrayed as emotionally disfigured for life, unable to shake the feeling that they are unlovable wimps, or that everybody is out to get them. The news bristles with reports that bullies abound. Recently, in one of the largest studies ever of child development, researchers at the National Institutes of Health reported that about a quarter of all middle-school children were either perpetrators or victims (or in some cases, both) of serious and chronic bullying, behavior that included threats, ridicule, name calling, punching, slapping, jeering and sneering. Another highly contentious study suggested that too much time in day care may predispose a child to bullying: youngsters who spent more than 30 hours a week away from mommy had a 17 percent chance of ending up as garden-variety bullies and troublemakers, compared to only 6 percent of children who spent less than 10 hours a week in day care. Everywhere, legislators are struggling to beat each other to the punch in demanding that schools stamp out bad behavior. In Colorado, for example, home to Columbine High School, Gov. Bill Owens has just signed legislation requiring all state school districts to develop anti-bullying programs to prevent bullying. In a similar spirit, the familiar phys-ed game of dodgeball -- also known as killerball, prison ball or bombardment -- is taking a hit lately, as school authorities nationwide have moved to ban the game on the theory that it fosters hyperaggression and gives the class klutzes an inferiority complex. Yet even as quick-fix programs with names like ''Taking the Bully by the Horns'' proliferate across the academic and electronic universe, experts in aggressive behavior warn that there is no easy way to stamp out bullying among children. Short of raising kids in isolation chambers, they say, bullying behaviors can never be eliminated entirely from the sustained hazing ritual otherwise known as growing up.''Can we get rid of bullying altogether? I don't think so,'' said Richard J. Hazler, a professor of counselor education at Ohio University in Athens. ''We can't eliminate all growing pains, either. It's tough learning to make your way in this world.''Philip C. Rodkin, an assistant professor of educational psychology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, pointed out that, despite all the attention being paid to the subject, the root causes of bullying remain a mystery. ''This is not a trivial problem,'' he said. ''Bullies have always been with us, and we're only beginning to ask why.''Some researchers say that, despite the hype and handwringing, there is no epidemic of bullying in schools, and in fact the incidence of serious bullying has very likely declined over the years.''It certainly was a problem when I was in boarding school, but that was ages ago,'' said Richard Dawkins, a professor at Oxford University who has studied the evolution of aggressive and selfish behavior. ''I believe there is far less bullying now, though there probably will always be a bit.''As an example of how bad it used to be, Professor Dawkins cited a passage from the British poet John Betjeman's 1960 autobiographical poem, ''Summoned by Bells.''Twelve to one:What chance had Angus? They surrounded him,Pulled off his coat and trousers, socks and shoesAnd, wretched in his shirt, they hoisted himInto the huge waste paper basket; thenPoured ink and treacle on his head. With ropesThey strung the basket up among the beamsAnd as he soared I only saw his eyesLook through the slats at us who watched below. As Frans de Waal, a primatologist at Emory University, sees it, one of the problems in the standard approach to bully analysis is that researchers tend to ignore the subtle dynamics between a bully and the object of a bully's scorn -- the scapegoat. ''Some individuals may have bully characteristics, and others may have scapegoat characteristics,'' he said. ''The two things need to be studied together, but because personality research is generally done from an individual perspective, they rarely are.''Dr. de Waal has observed that bullying behavior is quite common among most species of monkeys and apes, and that many animals at or near the top of the hierarchy will harass, charge, snap and howl at their subordinates for no other reason than because they can. But at least as striking as the presence of simian bullies, Dr. de Waal said, are the resident scapegoats, the low-ranking individuals who seem to be chosen for the role by other members of the group. Whenever a group is under strain, or when its hierarchy is in doubt, the higher-ranking primates start taking it out on the scapegoat, with the result that any time the beleaguered monkey ventures from its corner, it gets beaten up.''This is not just a way to release frustration,'' said Dr. de Waal. ''The scapegoat also gives the high-ranking individuals in the group a common enemy, a unifier. By uniting against the scapegoat in moments of tension, it creates a bond.''And while primate research can never be applied directly to human affairs, even when those humans are swinging from monkey bars, bully experts admit that children in groups will often encourage, or at least not discourage, a bully's nasty acts against an underling. In one study of how peers contribute to bullying, researchers from York University studied videotapes of 53 episodes of bullying among elementary school students on the school playground. The researchers found that 54 percent of the time, onlookers stood by passively as the bully picked on the victim, an inactive form of activity that the researchers said ended up reinforcing the bully's behavior. And 21 percent of the time, some of the onlookers joined in on the taunting. Only in 25 percent of the cases did a child attempt to step in and help the victim or call a teacher to help. But as researchers lately have discovered, many bullies in fact are quite popular. ''Some kids may be goaders, cheering the bully on because they want to be accepted,'' said Laura Hess Olson, an assistant professor of child development at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind. ''Or they may just stand by and do nothing because they're afraid they might be targeted next.'' Whatever the case, she added, ''We have to realize that everybody is a player in creating the atmosphere in which bullying occurs.''Another point worth noting, said Dr. Olson, is that the old stereotype of the bully as an antisocial and unpopular misfit is false. In one study of third-  to fifth-graders in two East Coast schools, she and her colleagues found that, while the students described by their peers and teachers as friendly, outgoing and self-confident were the most popular, the boys known to be bullies were the second-most popular group, way beyond the perceived wimps, eggheads and teacher's pets.''There are a fair amount of kids in a classroom who think that bullies are cool,'' said Dr. Rodkin, ''especially when they're attractive and athletic.''ADDING to the challenge of curbing bullies is the fact that, as researchers have learned, many students blame victims of bullying for bringing their troubles on themselves by sulking or whimpering or walking around with their head hanging low. A sizable number of students agree with the premise that bullying can help ''toughen'' people and teach which behaviors are laudable and which are risible to the group. In this scenario, then, bullies are neither born nor made, but instead have bulliness thrust upon them. The group needs its whipcracking rulemeister, just as an army boot camp needs its snarling, abusive sergeant if the soft-bellied newcomers are ever to get into fighting trim. Indeed, it's hard to see how bullying behavior in schools can be eliminated when bullying behavior among adults is not only common but often applauded -- at least if it results in wild success. J. P. Morgan, for example, was thought by many of his colleagues and subordinates to be, in the words of Robert M. LaFollette, the Wisconsin progressive, ''a beefy, red-faced thick-necked financial bully, drunk with wealth and power.'' Yet he was also lionized in his day, described by officials at Harvard University as a ''prince among merchants,'' a man of ''skill, wisdom and courage.'' Hey, he was the richest guy in the world, wasn't he? It's perhaps a bit of delicious paradox that, at a time when the nation is seized with concern over school bullying, the international community views with alarm the recent moves by the United States to scuttle the Kyoto global warming treaty and to promote the construction of a space-based nuclear missile shield. To the rest of the world, it seems, America is the biggest bully of them all.

A confidential Bush administration review has recommended that the United States not accept a draft agreement to enforce the treaty banning germ weapons, according to American officials. The recommendations appear certain to distress allies, who back the draft accord and are concerned that the new administration is concentrating too much on new military programs and not enough on treaties and nonproliferation. After six years of negotiations, diplomats in Geneva have produced the draft agreement, known as a protocol, which would establish measures to monitor the ban on biological weapons. A 1972 treaty, which 143 nations have ratified, prohibits the development, production and possession of biological weapons. But the treaty has always lacked a means of verifying compliance. United States support for the protocol is critical to the effort to give the treaty teeth. The Clinton administration cast the new protocol as an important tool to stem the spread of biological weapons. And international negotiators in Geneva have been rushing to complete it by November. But the new Bush administration has taken a far more skeptical approach. In a unanimous review, its interagency team concluded that the current version of the protocol would be inefficient in stopping cheating, and that all its deficiencies could not be remedied by the negotiating deadline.''The review says that the protocol would not be of much value in catching potential proliferators,'' a senior American official said. The White House has yet to formally endorse the review's conclusions, but since all the relevant agencies agreed to it, the White House is considered virtually certain to go along. The real issue is what steps to adopt in light of the recommendations, and how to proceed diplomatically. Although the review strongly objects to the current version of the protocol, it does not rule out fresh attempts to address monitoring. And the review is also emerging as a sensitive diplomatic problem.  President Bush heads to Europe next month, and his administration has already been under fire for steering too unilateralist a course on foreign policy, by backing away from the Kyoto accords on global warming and, to a lesser extent, the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. So the White House is eager to avoid a new split. Tibor Toth, the Hungarian diplomat who has overseen the effort to negotiate the protocol, will fly to Washington this week to try to change the Bush administration's mind, American officials said.''Different constituencies seem to see different flaws, which indicates it is a pretty good compromise,'' Mr. Toth said in a telephone interview. ''If it still needs to be fixed, we have the time. Barriers have been raised to nuclear and chemical proliferation. If the world community fails to agree on a protocol to strengthen the ban on biological weapons after six years of talks, it will send a very unfortunate message.''The first step to ban germ weapons was taken when President Richard M. Nixon and other world leaders signed the treaty in 1972, at the dawn of arms control. But the agreement had no means of enforcing compliance. That became an enormous concern after President Boris N. Yeltsin conceded in 1992 that the Soviet Union had violated the accord by maintaining a long-standing biological-weapons program after the treaty went into force. Then evidence was acquired after the Persian Gulf war confirming that Iraq also had germ weapons, heightening fears over biological warfare. Most of the dozen or so countries that are believed to have biological weapons programs -- like Iran, Iraq, Libya and North Korea -- are members of the 1972 treaty. So a decade ago, during the administration of Mr. Bush's father, the United States and other nations began studying what could be done to monitor the treaty. Six years ago, they began talks on a new protocol. There have been many obstacles. China, which has little experience with formal arms-control treaties, is reluctant to allow on-site inspections. Pakistan is concerned that inspectors searching for germ weapons might investigate its nuclear weapons sites. And in the negotiations Iran has been trying to weaken controls on the export of biological equipment and materials, saying they hurt its civilian economies. The United States, for its part, has had conflicting motivations. On one hand, it has worked to limit the scope of visits by foreign inspectors in order to protect American pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, which dominate the worldwide industry and are concerned with protecting their trade secrets. And at the behest of the Pentagon, the government tried to limit inspections of American biodefense installations, which develop vaccines and  protective equipment and analyze the germ warfare threat. As a result, the United States has not been as tough on verification as most of its allies. And yet Washington also hoped that the protocol would discourage cheating. Under the 210-page protocol, parties agree to make known their vaccine production facilities, the largest biodefense installations and facilities that do genetic engineering or aerosol studies with germ agents that are most likely to be used in weapons. But it would not require a declaration of all types of facilities that could be used to make weapons, including food and beverage plants and some pharmaceutical plants. As for inspections, a new executive council would be established and a majority vote of the body would be required before an investigation of a suspicious plant could be carried out. That procedure, insisted on by American industry, is less strict than a similar provision in the treaty banning chemical weapons, which stipulates that such investigations are to be done unless there is a vote by three-fourths of a similar body to block them. Inspectors under the biological protocol would have to be granted access 108 hours after an inspection was approved. Defenders say the goal of the protocol was never to provide air-tight verification but rather to increase  the chances that cheaters would be caught and thereby deter violations. Some monitoring and openness, they say, is better than none. But critics of the protocol say the accord would not really provide much security. A nation that was determined to cheat could find a way to do so and might use the limited inspections to throw other nations off the trail, they say. In this view, the United States would open itself up to inspections and get little in return. When the Bush administration took office, the issue came to the fore. Donald A. Mahley, the American negotiator at the talks, proposed a review. The interagency group he led included working-level officials from the State Department, the Pentagon, the Commerce Department, the Energy Department and intelligence agencies. The review found 38 problems with the protocol, a handful of them serious. But its basic assessment was very critical. It concluded that the verification measures in the treaty were unlikely to detect cheating. At the same time, the review concluded that these same provisions might be used by foreign governments to try to steal American secrets. The review recommended that the United States not support the draft protocol that Ambassador Toth had overseen. And it concluded that there was not enough time to fix all the problems before the negotiating deadline. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell has approved the review, which has been circulating in the administration. Officially, however, the White House insists that the review has not been completed, in part because it has yet to figure out a new policy. But as word of the review has begun to seep out, it is already prompting debate. Barbara H. Rosenberg, a specialist at the Federation of American Scientists, said the Bush administration should have worked to improve the accord during the last negotiating round if it did not like it. Instead, the United States was passive, with the new administration claiming that it could not act while the policy review was supposedly under way.''The U.S. sat quietly throughout the sessions and said nothing,'' Dr. Rosenberg said. ''It made no effort to improve the text.''But Michael L. Moodie, a senior arms control official in the first Bush administration, said the protocol was severely flawed and needed to be replaced by a new approach.''The protocol was not going to get the job done,'' Mr. Moodie said. ''It is it not going to deter proliferation.'' And if it was put into effect, he said, ''we still would not be confident that there were not major violations going on.''If the White House, as expected, affirms the review, it has several  alternatives. One is to try to improve the accord before the November deadline but to accept the fact that the United States is unlikely to obtain all the changes it would like. But there is little or no support for that approach in the administration. Another is to ask that the deadline be extended so that negotiators would work on a substantially different protocol. Or the United States could take a significantly different approach. Supporters of that idea, which is being actively discussed in the administration, say Washington should propose a stripped-down version of the protocol that would provide for investigations when violations of the convention are suspected. Such inspections, for example, might be carried out if there was a suspicious outbreak of disease, as happened in Sverdlovsk, Russia, in 1979 when anthrax spores escaped from a biological weapons plant. There is a recognition within the administration that breaking off talks on biological-weapons monitoring altogether is not feasible because of diplomatic costs. That is especially the case because the administration is already involved in sensitive talks with its allies on the missile defense issue and has been eager to show that it is not ideologically opposed to arms control. Still, the turnabout in American policy is likely to provoke concern from American allies, particularly the British, who have been very active on the treaty. When Prime Minister Tony Blair visited Washington in February, he insisted that the United States promise to pursue nonproliferation measures and not just missile defense, and the Bush administration agreed to mention nonproliferation in the statement that both leaders issued. Correction:  May 22, 2001, Tuesday  Because of a production error, an article on Sunday about a confidential Bush administration review of policy on the treaty to ban germ weapons omitted a passage in some copies. The affected paragraph, referring to Tibor Toth, a Hungarian diplomat who has tried to negotiate an agreement to enforce the treaty, read: '' 'Different constituencies seem to see different flaws, which indicates it is a pretty good compromise,' Mr. Toth said in a telephone interview. 'If it still needs to be fixed, we have the time.' ''Correction: May 22, 2001, TuesdayBecause of a production error, an article on Sunday about a confidential Bush administration review of policy on the treaty to ban germ weapons omitted a passage in some copies. The affected paragraph, referring to Tibor Toth, a Hungarian diplomat who has tried to negotiate an agreement to enforce the treaty, read: '' 'Different constituencies seem to see different flaws, which indicates it is a pretty good compromise,' Mr. Toth said in a telephone interview. 'If it still needs to be fixed, we have the time.' ''<br>

Unhappy that President Clinton signed the global treaty creating an international criminal court, some officials in the Bush administration and some members of Congress are trying to get Washington to pressure other countries to reject it. This effort would strain America's already uneasy relations with its allies and limit the administration's flexibility on important national security matters. The Bush administration would better serve American interests by trying to change the provisions of the court it considers harmful. The international criminal court will be able to prosecute those accused of genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes. The treaty establishing the court has been signed by 139 nations, and so far 31 have ratified it. When 60 countries ratify, which is likely over the next few years, the court will begin work. Several top Pentagon officials fear that American troops serving in countries that have ratified the treaty might be arrested on false charges and sent to The Hague for trial. While it is important to guard against politically motivated prosecutions, the court already has numerous safeguards to ensure that it deals only with the most serious cases, is staffed by respected and reasonable judges, and would take jurisdiction of a case only after a suspect's own national court system had exhausted its own options. Opponents of the court would like an ironclad guarantee that the court would never try an American. Absent such a commitment, they want to block creation of the court by pressing countries not to ratify the treaty. This position may prevail in the administration, although more moderate officials would prefer to see Washington simply renounce its own signature of the treaty. The House, for its part, recently passed a bill that would require America to cut off military aid to most countries that ratify the treaty, unless they pledge never to surrender an American to the court. The bill also authorizes Washington to use force to rescue Americans -- even from the Netherlands, where the court will be based. The administration's wisest course is not to try to undermine the court. It probably cannot stop 29 more nations from ratifying the treaty, and to attempt to do so would further alienate allies that are already wary of President Bush's desire to build a missile shield and his decision to withdraw the United States from the Kyoto agreement on global warming. America would also lose its remaining influence in shaping the court, and there are upcoming decisions that matter to Washington, such as the definition of new crimes and selection of judges. The international criminal court is going to be a reality. If the Bush administration feels the safeguards protecting Americans from show trials are inadequate, it should try to strengthen them, not waste global influence in a futile attempt to prevent the court's establishment.

Ever since the U.S. got voted off the island at the U.N. Human Rights Commission three weeks ago, Congress has been hopping mad and the U.N.-haters have been on a tear. So I have an idea: Let's quit the U.N. That's right, let's just walk. Most of its members don't speak English anyway. What an insult! Let's just shut it down and turn it into another Trump Tower. That Security Council table would make a perfect sushi bar. No? You don't want to leave the U.N. to the Europeans and Russians? Then let's stop bellyaching about the U.N., and manipulating our dues, and start taking it seriously for what it is -- a global forum that spends 95 percent of its energy endorsing the wars and peacekeeping missions that the U.S. wants endorsed, or taking on the thankless humanitarian missions that the U.S. would like done but doesn't want to do itself. The U.N. actually spends only 5 percent of its time annoying the U.S. Not a bad deal. The vote that got the U.S. booted off the Human Rights Commission was to the U.N. what Senator Jim Jeffords's vote to leave the Republican Party was to the Senate -- a wake-up call, a signal that the world will push back against radical Bush policies just as Senator Jeffords did. When President Bush trashed the Kyoto treaty on climate change, the message the world got was that the Bushies will do whatever they please, on a range of issues, and if the world doesn't like it -- tough. So, not surprisingly, when the members of this U.N. commission got a chance to vote anonymously on whether the U.S. should be a member, they stuck it to us. People with power often don't think about it; people without power think about it all the time.(But it would be wrong to blame this vote entirely on anger with the Bushies. That lets the Europeans off too easily. As Nina Shea, a former U.S. delegate to the U.N. Human Rights Commission, wrote in The Weekly Standard, the fact that so many Europeans could participate in the U.S. being voted out ''reflects the abandonment of their historical commitment to human rights.'' Repeatedly at the commission, the U.S. has had to break with the Europeans in order to vote its conscience on issues like slavery in Sudan and repression  in China and Cuba.)Nevertheless, maybe now that Senator Jeffords has instilled some humility in the Bush team, and ensured that Jesse Helms will no longer be chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee -- which he singlehandedly ground into irrelevance with, among other things, his juvenile anti-U.N. crusades -- we can get back to taking the U.N. seriously. The fact is, the world is full of problems that touch America, that the U.N. handles -- problems related to childhood diseases, which Unicef addresses; problems of poverty in Africa, which the U.N.D.P. addresses; problems of refugees, which the U.N.H.C.R. addresses; and problems related to AIDS, which are coordinated by UNAIDS. Also, there are now 16 U.N. peacekeeping missions. For the past decade, Bangladesh, Nigeria, Fiji and Nepal have been doing U.N. peacekeeping that the U.S. wants done but doesn't want to do itself. These poor countries do U.N. peacekeeping to earn extra cash, and have been paying the salaries of the U.N. peacekeepers themselves, while waiting for years for the U.S. to pay its dues. So the world's richest country has been taking interest-free loans from the world's poorest, dollar-a-day economies. That's embarrassing. All these problems would exist whether the U.N. were there or not. So what the U.N. provides 95 percent of the time is a body for coordinating our response to problems we care about. And it does it in a way that ensures that the burden of costs is shared, so that the U.S. doesn't have to pay alone, and that the burden of responsibility is shared, so that wars the U.S. wants fought, or the peace accords the U.S. wants kept, have a global stamp of approval, not made-in-U.S.A.The dirty little secret of the Human Rights Commission vote is that it is precisely because 95 percent of the time the U.N. is simply a tool of the U.S. that a few countries, when they got a chance to stick it to us, did so. But if we can't understand that on just about every other day the real vote at the U.N., the vote that matters, is 95 to 5 -- 95 percent of the time it acts in our interests and 5 percent not -- then shame on us. Gail Collins is on vacation.

And now for a wild prediction. Within 12 months President Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney and all their backers in the oil industry will be begging -- begging -- to revive the Kyoto protocol on climate change, the accord Mr. Bush yanked America out of after taking office. Why, you ask? Well, look what's happening in England. A group of celebrities there have joined with environmentalists to launch a boycott against Exxon Mobil gas stations, which in Europe go by the name Esso. Bianca Jagger, the pop star Annie Lennox and Anita Rodrick, founder of the Body Shop chain, helped launch the boycott because, as Ms. Jagger said, ''This is a way to tell Esso that it's not right for them to be claiming that there is no connection between CO2 emissions and climate change.''People connected with Exxon reportedly contributed more than $1 million to the Bush campaign. Exxon is a key supporter of research and advertisements that try to cast doubt on the seriousness of global warming and its link to fossil fuel emissions. Exxon was a big backer of President Bush's decision to pull the U.S. out of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which called for industrialized nations to steadily reduce their carbon dioxide emissions. Exxon is also a major force behind the Global Climate Coalition, a business lobby that opposed Kyoto. The ''Stop Esso Campaign'' is asking British drivers to shun Esso stations until the company supports Kyoto (see www. stopesso. com). The campaign recently spread to France. What's funny is that probably none of this would have happened had Mr. Bush not bowed to the oil companies and pulled the U.S. out of Kyoto. That may turn out to be his greatest gift to environmentalism. You see, as long as everyone was discussing how to implement Kyoto, no one wanted to take any radical steps. Governments could say they were working on the problem, but that negotiations were hard. Corporations could mumble nice words about environmentalism, but not worry anything serious was going to happen. And environmentalists could feel their cause was being advanced, even though implementation was far off.''As long as Kyoto was there, everyone could avoid real accountability and pretend that something was happening,'' says Paul Gilding, the former head of Greenpeace and now chairman of Ecos, one of Australia's leading environmental consulting firms. ''But now George Bush, by trashing Kyoto, has blown everyone's cover. If you care about the environment you can't pretend anymore. Emissions are increasing, the climate is changing and people can now see for themselves that the world is fiddling while Rome burns.''The result: Environmentalists refuse to sit on their hands anymore. Instead, the smart ones are mobilizing consumers to fight multinational polluters on their own ground. You have to admire it. It's so Republican -- using the free market. If I were Exxon, I would be worried -- especially when U.S. college students come back to campus in the fall. Remember Monsanto? It was going to sell genetically modified food to Europeans. But environmentalists in Europe -- worried, rightly or wrongly, about the safety of what they were eating -- mobilized the weakest link in the value chain: consumers. Consumers demanded ''G.M.O.-free'' food. So supermarkets demanded it from their suppliers, suppliers demanded it from farmers and farmers demanded it from Monsanto. Goodbye, Monsanto. This is real globalization activism. ''The smart activists are now saying, 'O.K., You want to play markets -- let's play,' '' says Mr. Gilding. They don't waste time throwing stones or lobbying governments. That takes forever and can easily be counter-lobbied by corporations. No, no, no. They start with consumers at the pump, get them to pressure the gas stations, get the station owners to pressure the companies and the companies to pressure governments. After all, consumers do have choices where they buy their gas, and there are differences now. Shell and BP-Amoco (which is also the world's biggest solar company) both withdrew from the oil industry lobby that has been dismissing climate change. What Mr. Bush did in trashing Kyoto was to leave serious environmental activists with nowhere else to turn but the market. The smart ones get it. You will be hearing from them soon -- at a gas station near you.

A panel of top American scientists declared today that global warming was a real problem and was getting worse, a conclusion that may lead President Bush to change his stand on the issue  as he heads next week to Europe, where the United States is seen as a major source of the air pollution held responsible for climate change. In a much-anticipated report from the National Academy of Sciences, 11 leading atmospheric scientists, including previous skeptics about global warming, reaffirmed the mainstream scientific view that the earth's atmosphere was getting warmer and that human activity was largely responsible.''Greenhouse gases are accumulating in earth's atmosphere as a result of human activities, causing surface air temperatures and subsurface ocean temperatures to rise,'' the report said. ''Temperatures are, in fact, rising.''The report was requested by the White House last month in anticipation of an international meeting on global warming in Bonn in July but arrived just before President Bush leaves next week for Europe, a trip that includes talks on global warming with leaders of the 15 European Union countries in Goteborg, Sweden. European leaders expressed outrage in March when Mr. Bush rejected the global warming pact known as the Kyoto Protocol, an international treaty negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, in 1997, and the subject has been building as an important test of the administration's foreign policy. In the White House's first official acknowledgment of the academy's conclusions, Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, told reporters today, ''This is a president who takes extremely seriously what we do know about climate change, which is essentially that there is warming taking place.''Mr. Bush and many in his cabinet, who discussed the subject at length on Tuesday, have been trying to hammer out a proposal on limiting the pollutants that cause global warming.''A cabinet-level working group is still working on what it wishes to say to the president before we go to Europe,'' Ms. Rice said. She said Mr. Bush would talk with the allies ''a little bit about what we've learned thus far.''Without being specific, Ms. Rice said Mr. Bush was being guided by certain principles in formulating a proposal.''One would want to be certain that developing countries were accounted for in some way, that technology and science really ought to be important parts of this answer, that we cannot do something that damages the American economy or other economies because growth is also important,'' she said. In response to critics who have suggested that Mr. Bush is ignoring an issue of mounting international concern, Ms. Rice portrayed the group as feverishly committed to educating itself and coming up with a proposal.''It has been a matter of bringing up to speed some of the highest-ranking people in this government,'' she said. ''I would dare say -- dare challenge you to find a situation in which you've had so many high-ranking people sitting there week after week after week, understanding the  challenge that we face in global climate change, everybody from the vice president, the secretary of state, the secretary of interior, secretary of  agriculture. It has been quite something to see all of these people grappling with the issue.''Administration officials have said privately that the White House could have handled the matter with greater tact, and Ms. Rice conceded as much today.''The president had made clear when he was a candidate that he did not believe the Kyoto Protocol addressed the problem of climate change in a way that the United States could support,'' she said. ''In retrospect, perhaps the fact that we understood that we had already said this was not immediately observable to everybody, and it might have been better to let people know again, in advance, including our allies, that we were not going to support the protocol.''This was unusually blunt talk from a White House that until now has fastidiously avoided the phrase ''global warming'' and repeatedly expressed doubts about the clarity of the science underlying the theory that emissions from smokestacks and tailpipes were heating the atmosphere in ways that posed a threat. In an indication of the headwind that Mr. Bush is sailing into next week in Europe, the journal Science, published by an American scientific organization, recently carried an open letter signed by 16 prestigious scientific panels in countries around the world calling for ''prompt action'' to reduce the gases like carbon dioxide that trap heat like in a greenhouse. The increase in temperatures, the editorial said, ''will be accompanied by rising sea levels, more intense precipitation events in some countries and increased risk of drought in others and adverse effects on agriculture, health and water balance.''It continued, ''We urge everyone -- individuals, businesses and governments -- to take prompt action to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.''Many international business executives have been pressuring the administration to move more aggressively on the issue. And so has a powerful band of Mr. Bush's closest advisers, including Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, Ms. Rice, Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill, and Christie Whitman, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. Today's report reflects the increasing certainty of the scientific community here and abroad that the warming of the last 50 years is probably because of the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations. The panel said the degree of confidence in this conclusion was ''higher today than it was 10 or even 5 years ago.''Still, it said, large uncertainties limit predictions of the extent and consequences -- good and bad -- of future warming. But it affirmed the scientific consensus that human-caused climate warming could well be a dominant environmental problem throughout the new century, depending on how fast the gases accumulate in coming decades.''Human-induced warming and associated sea level rises are expected to continue through the 21st century,'' it said. And it said that ''national policy decisions made now and in the longer-term future will influence the extent of any damage suffered by vulnerable human populations and ecosystems later in this century.''The report thus all but eliminates one reason the administration has been using to forestall any action on global warming. And it deals a strong card to Democrats on Capitol Hill who have long sought more aggressive action on global warming. Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and a leading advocate of action said of the report, ''It confirms in stark terms the reality that many of us had accepted a considerable amount of time ago and refutes an effort by the White House to seek some sort of escape hatch from that reality.''Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska and a longtime critic of the Kyoto Protocol, instead highlighted the uncertainty mentioned in the report and drew the opposite conclusion of Mr. Kerry.''This report is certainly not a prescription for the drastic measures required under the Kyoto Protocol,'' Mr. Hagel said in a statement. Nonetheless, in a nod toward the unanimity of the scientific community, he added: ''This report does provide us with enough evidence to move forward in a responsible, reasonable and achievable way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It provides us with a basis to move forward with an alternative to the Kyoto Protocol.''Environmentalists hailed the report as a significant step in the long effort to force the United States to curtail greenhouse gases. Phil Clapp, president of the National Environmental Trust, said, ''The president can no longer wiggle out of aggressive action by arguing that the science is inconclusive.''Mr. Clapp also suggested that the report called into question Mr. Bush's proposed energy plan, which seeks to step up production of coal, oil and gas-fired power plants.''This makes the president's energy plan look completely irresponsible,'' he said. Mr. Clapp said environmental groups had estimated that if the energy plan was fully put into effect, it would increase the pollution that causes global warming by 35 percent over the next decade. The report was written by 11 atmospheric scientists who are members of the National Academy of Sciences. The authors included Dr. Richard S. Lindzen, a meteorologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who for years has expressed skepticism about some of the more dire predictions of other climate scientists about the significance of human-caused warming. The report was requested on May 11 in a letter to Dr. Bruce Alberts, the president of the National Academy of Sciences, from John M. Bridgeland, deputy assistant to the president for domestic policy, and Gary Edson, deputy assistant to the president for international economic affairs. A statement from the academy today said, ''The White House requested this fast-track review of the state of climate science in preparation for international discussions on global warming scheduled to take place in the coming weeks.''Initially, the White House asked two questions of the academy: What are the greatest strengths and weaknesses in the science pointing to human-caused warming? And, are there significant differences between the full scientific analysis completed recently by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, sponsored by the United Nations, and the final executive summary? There have been three assessments of global warming by the international panel since 1990, and each has drawn a more conclusive picture than the last of the link between human activities and the prospects for significant harm to agriculture, ecosystems and coastlines. But conservatives in Congress -- notably Senators Hagel and Larry E. Craig, Republican of Idaho -- and groups representing industries whose business depends on fossil fuels have long criticized the findings of the international panel as biased, pointing particularly to differences between the voluminous chapters on complicated scientific points and briskly worded summaries that tend to influence policy. The panel, led by Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone, the chancellor of the University of California at Irvine, met initially in California and spent the next weeks intensively sifting the existing science. The report does provide some ammunition for critics in its description of the conclusion of the international climate group. It concluded, for example, that the international panel had a tendency in its executive summary to understate caveats and focus on the harsher possible consequences of climate warming. But over all, the panel described the international work as ''admirable'' and robustly supported its conclusions. In a telephone interview today, Dr. Cicerone said he hoped the report, by spelling out the scientific basis for various predictions, would dispel some unwarranted skepticism about aspects of the warming problem. One climate scientist who critiqued a draft of the new report for the academy said no one in the administration should be surprised at the firm nature of the result.''They asked a string of questions that might have been appropriate in 1990,'' the scientist said.''Hello?'' he said. ''Where've you been the last decade?''

Cable Giants Refuse to Sell Ads to Internet Competitors  As the battle to provide high-speed Internet service heats up, the cable television giants are increasingly using a defensive tactic: refusing to sell advertising time to phone companies to promote digital subscriber lines, an advanced phone network technology that competes with cable modems. No laws or regulations appear to bar cable companies from blocking advertisements from competitors. But combined with the cable carriers' strong market power, the advertising bans are raising concerns from some consumer advocates. [Page A1. ]Power Costs Decline in California  After months of baleful forecasts about California's worsening energy situation, electricity prices have fallen sharply in the last two weeks. Industry and public officials were quick to caution that the state still faces summer blackouts and that many factors could send prices spiraling higher again. [A14. ]I.M.F. Appoints No. 2 Official  The International Monetary Fund announced that it had named Anne O. Krueger, a Stanford University economist and a strong proponent of global free trade, to serve as its No. 2 official, responsible for carrying out the fund's role as the world's financial firefighter. Ms. Krueger will replace Stanley Fischer, who during his seven years at the fund managed a series of financial rescue efforts. [C5. ]I.B.M. Finds Way to Speed Up Chips  I.B.M. plans to announce that it has figured out how to stretch silicon during semiconductor manufacturing, a development that is expected to allow it to start making faster, less power-hungry chips within two years. [C2. ]Bristol to Buy DuPont Drug Unit  Bristol-Myers Squibb agreed to acquire the drug business of DuPont for $7.8 billion cash, bolstering its stable of AIDS drugs. [C5. ]Accenture to Eliminate 600 Jobs  Accenture, the consulting firm formerly known as Andersen Consulting, announced that it would lay off about 600 employees and encourage up to 800 consultants to take voluntary sabbaticals for up to one year. [C5. ]Chip Stocks Lift Technology Sector  Semiconductor stocks rallied sharply, leading the overall technology sector higher. The Nasdaq composite index rose 46.27 points, or 2.1 percent, to 2,264.00. The rest of the stock market was modestly higher. The Dow Jones industrial average gained 20.50 points, or 0.2 percent, to 11,090.74, while the broader Standard & Poor's 500-stock index climbed 6.93 points, or 0.6 percent, to 1,276.96. [C5. ]Retailers' Sales Rose 0.7% in May  Retailers' sales rose 0.7 percent in May, less than expected, as shoppers spent less on clothing and sought bargains at discounters like Wal-Mart Stores to weather the slowing economy. The results trailed the firm's forecast of a 1.5 percent gain. Sales lagged a 3 percent gain in April and 4 percent increase in the month a year earlier. [C4. ]Bush Acknowledges Global Warming  The White House acknowledged that climate change was a problem but gave little clue as to what it intended to do about it. One crucial debate is how much to rely on the framework of the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty on global warming that President Bush walked away from in March. Several multinational corporations favor the accord as a basis for some kind of agreement. [A16. ]AOL Time Warner to Buy Magazine  AOL Time Warner agreed to buy Business 2.0, the ailing new economy magazine, and merge it with its eCompany Now magazine. [C12. ]Boeing Finds Suspicious Damage  Boeing has found ''suspicious wire damage'' on several 737's under assembly at its plant in Washington State and the F.A.A. has called in the F.B.I. to investigate. [A14. ]

With a new scientific report in hand that reaffirms the reality of global warming, the Bush White House readily acknowledged today that climate change was a problem but gave little clue as to what it intended to do about it. Ari Fleischer, the president's spokesman, told reporters that when President Bush heads for Europe next week: ''He's going to tell the Europeans that he takes this issue very seriously, that global climate change is an issue that nations do need to deal with -- all nations, industrialized nations, the United States, developing nations, as well. And that through technologies and through growth and through other measures, that the world has a responsibility to face up to this.''This is the strongest language the White House has used on the issue and a far cry from its earlier position that the science was too uncertain to proclaim global warming a problem. But a report from the National Academy of Sciences, requested by the White House and released on Wednesday, reaffirmed the mainstream scientific view that the earth's temperature is rising, largely because of human activities, and that this could cause drastic climate changes throughout the century. Even before the report, the president was meeting with cabinet officials to work out a position and figure out how to present it at home and abroad. Mr. Bush is expected to address the subject of global warming on Monday before leaving for Europe that night. Administration officials said that a draft of his remarks was being reworked to reflect a more accommodating tone because of the new report. Still, it is not clear whether the president will speak in generalities or put forth a specific proposal that he will take to appease European leaders, who have been furious with him for walking away in March from the international treaty on global warming, known as the Kyoto Protocol. Environmentalists say that the central argument in the White House is whether to require countries to live under mandatory emission limits or to allow them to comply voluntarily. Mr. Fleischer declined today to specify what approaches the White House was considering but said that it was looking at a wide variety of proposals, ''many with great specificity about what to do.''Another debate is over how much to rely on the framework of the Kyoto accord, with its market-based incentives, to draft a new proposal. Some administration officials contend that Kyoto, which required mandatory emission reductions, is something the president would never accept and that it would be bad for the American economy. Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, which represents several multinational corporations that favor the Kyoto accord as a basis for some kind of agreement, said: ''Our companies are convinced this is a serious problem, convinced there will be an international agreement, and want the rules flexible and market based. And Kyoto has that framework.'' The companies represented by Pew include DuPont, the Enron Corporation and Alcoa. Ms. Claussen said the Bush administration was trying to figure out what approach to take on emissions in the United States before agreeing with other countries on limiting emissions. ''They are weighing very heavily what they are prepared to do at home before deciding what to do abroad,'' she said. But that inevitably leads to a conflict with the administration's energy proposal, which relies heavily on increasing production of coal and oil refineries, a difficult position for the administration to advocate at the same time it advocated reduced emissions. The problem of global warming was given only glancing attention in the energy report released last month. Ian Bowles, President Bill Clinton's senior director of global environmental affairs at the National Security Council, said that he understood the Bush White House to be focusing on domestic emissions as well, and that this could be useful.''The big-picture dynamic that the Clinton administration faced on Kyoto was that Europe never thought the U.S. was serious about reducing its own emissions,'' Mr. Bowles said. ''Bush is correct that this boils down to whether the U.S. does anything domestically. But if Bush says our plan is to acknowledge that global warming is real and create incentives and voluntary commitments, that will be wholly unpersuasive to Europe.''Mr. Bowles is a co-author of an article in the journal Science in which he discusses the challenges of creating an international treaty on climate change. One of the big problems, he noted, is that climate change is occurring on a vast geologic time scale that is not usually evident to politicians running for office on a four-year cycle.''Temperature changes during any single election cycle are likely to be quite small,'' the article says.

A National Academy of Sciences report reaffirming the threat of global warming, and declaring fearlessly that human activity is largely responsible for it, virtually requires President Bush to engage an issue he has consistently underestimated. It also provides another compelling reason for his administration to rewrite an unbalanced energy strategy that relies far too heavily on producing more of the same fossil fuels that lie at the root of the warming problem. Mr. Bush began his tenure by abandoning a campaign pledge to seek national limits on carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas, and by renouncing the Kyoto Protocol, the 1997 treaty that committed industrialized countries to mandatory reductions of carbon dioxide and five other greenhouse gases. Ever since, and well before the academy's new report, pressures have been building on Mr. Bush to reverse course. Japan and the Europeans have been urging him to rethink his rejection of Kyoto, and Congress is considering legislation that would require significant reductions in carbon dioxide emissions. Meanwhile many of Mr. Bush's natural allies in the corporate community, ignoring his indifference to global warming, have taken unilateral steps to control emissions of greenhouse gases, partly for environmental reasons and partly because the efficiencies required to achieve such reductions make sound business sense. DuPont is aiming to cut its emissions by 40 percent, and Alcoa, which until recently was run by Mr. Bush's Treasury secretary, Paul O'Neill, plans reductions of 25 percent. These are huge reductions. Even foreign companies are signing up. Just this week Pemex, the Mexican oil giant, agreed to a 10-year program of carbon dioxide reductions that was devised in conjunction with Environmental Defense, an American advocacy group. Mr. Bush should be leading this parade, not watching it. To be sure, there have been cabinet-level discussions in recent days aimed at devising proposals he can take with him on his European visit next Tuesday. Environmentalists who were largely ignored during the creation of the administration's energy plan have now been drawn into discussions about possible improvements to it. And yesterday, confronted with a report that Mr. Bush himself had ordered up, the White House grudgingly and belatedly acknowledged the existence of ''sound science'' on which to base a global-warming policy. But the administration gave no indication of what that policy might be, nor was there any suggestion that it is ready to undergo two fundamental changes in attitude and policy essential to any sensible strategy. The first would involve a profound rethinking of the administration's energy proposals, now heavily weighted toward increasing energy supplies, particularly fossil fuels. A more balanced and indeed less costly approach would embrace an aggressive program of energy efficiency aimed at producing more fuel-efficient cars and moderating demand for electric power. The second and perhaps more important step is for Mr. Bush to accept the fact that there can be no solution without American leadership. The United States must lead not only because it is the world's biggest offender, producing one-fourth of the world's greenhouse emissions with only 5 percent of the population, but because for all of Mr. Bush's diffidence on the issue, it is still the country to which other nations turn first for policy guidance and technological inspiration.

So here's an interesting question that you hear around Europe these days: What will the Bush foreign policy be? No, no -- not what was it during the campaign, not what was it for its first 100 days, but what will it really be? In case you haven't noticed, the world lately has done for the Bush foreign policy what Senator Jim Jeffords did for the Bush domestic policy -- pushed back. With the Bush team having come into office controlling the White House, the House, the Senate, the Supreme Court and a docile press, there were no internal brakes. So -- up to now -- it has been left to America's democratic allies in Europe, rather than the Democrats in Congress, to provide the counterweight. If one were to put this in mathematical terms: The Bush team came into office advocating foreign policy A. It ran into a world demanding more of foreign policy B. And if A plus B equals C, what will C be? For instance, the Bush Treasury secretary, Paul O'Neill, heaped scorn on the Clinton team's ''too frequent'' willingness to bail out key allies when their economies collapsed. Well, Turkey just received a $17 billion I.M.F. and World Bank bailout, including $8 billion in April approved by the Bush team. Argentina just resumed getting its $13 billion, Bush-approved bailout-for-reform package from the I.M.F. The Bushies claim that only I.M.F., not U.S., funds are being used, but the U.S. is the biggest contributor to the I.M.F. Frankly, the Bush team made the correct decisions on both Turkey and Argentina. But it leaves hanging the question: What is its real approach to bailouts? The Bush team came into office loudly proclaiming its intention to get U.S. troops out of Bosnia and Kosovo. But European officials say that after listening to Secretary of State Colin Powell during last week's meeting with NATO leaders in Hungary, they felt reassured that the U.S. would not be going anywhere soon, and would generally stick by the NATO principle ''in together, out together.'' Again, it's good the Bush team is challenging Europe to take more responsibility for the Balkans. But no NATO operation will work for long without the U.S. in the middle. Everyone else will drift away, and we can't afford that in Southern Europe. So what is the real Bush defense policy there? At the Hungary NATO meeting, the NATO allies, led by France and Germany, refused to bow to Mr. Powell's request that they endorse the Bush Star Wars missile defense plan and issue a communiqu saying that the Western allies faced a common ballistic-missile threat. Germany's foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, explained the European position by noting that any missile defense plan ''must add to our security and stability . . . not lead to another arms race.'' Will the Bush team now push ahead on its own or slow down? In the Middle East, the Bushies insisted -- with good reason -- that they would not be dragged into Arab-Israeli peacemaking unless the parties were serious. But pressure from America's Arab allies to ''do something'' before the instability spreads prompted Mr. Bush to send low-level diplomats, and now the C.I.A. director, to mediate. Ditto North Korea. First the president trashed the Clinton negotiations with the North. But with both America's European and Asian allies appalled by that, Mr. Bush has now ordered a resumption of talks. How will they be different? Maybe the biggest question Europeans will have for President Bush when he comes here next week is: Now that you have dumped the Kyoto treaty as a vehicle for reducing global warming -- which the National Academy of Sciences just confirmed is happening -- what will you replace Kyoto with? The answer needs to be a serious plan, say Greek officials, otherwise it will cause a major rift with Europe's people. There is nothing wrong with a new team coming in and saying: We're going to be tougher than the previous lot. Some of Mr. Bush's instincts are right. But there is a fine line between a tougher effective foreign policy and a tougher ineffective foreign policy, with no allies. Clearly the Bushies don't want the latter. But it remains to be seen what their option C is -- where exactly they will strike the balance between their campaign rhetoric and the world of our allies. The Bushies started out with anti-Clintonism as their framework. They are now abandoning that -- but without defining an intellectual framework for their new approach. Foreign Affairs

President Bush will carry few specific proposals when he embarks on his first major overseas trip on Monday, hoping instead that face-to-face encounters will win over Europeans skeptical of his policies and abilities.''The common European perception is of a shallow, arrogant, gun-loving, abortion-hating, Christian fundamentalist Texan buffoon,'' said a senior administration official. ''They read all the press about a hard-line unilateralist. They really believe this stuff about cowboys. We need to get it all on a higher plane.''Though Mr. Bush and his aides say they are aware of Europe's disagreements with the administration on a range of issues -- including the death penalty and the environment -- they have been depicting these as problems that could be overcome by the president's charm and personality -- as happened, experts note, with President Ronald Reagan nearly two decades ago. Mr. Bush arrived tonight at his ranch in Crawford, Tex., where he will spend the weekend receiving briefings from his national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice. The briefings are intended to ensure that the president, who has seldom traveled abroad, will be ready to transform himself into a player on the world stage. During the five-country trip, which will include a meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, Mr. Bush will confront a Europe increasingly aware of -- and prepared to exercise its economic and diplomatic influence on -- matters including missile defense, climate change, the American peacekeeping role in the Balkans and the creation of a European military force to complement NATO. European leaders have made it clear that they are uncomfortable with the American positions on those issues, and with the unilateralism that seems to underlie them. On a personal level, many European leaders and opinion makers view Mr. Bush as a political and intellectual lightweight who has flubbed basic tests on foreign affairs,  and whose position on some social issues like capital punishment is out of sync with that of the rest of the world. The perceptions will only be strengthened by the impending execution of Timothy J. McVeigh -- the first federal execution in the United States in 38 years. It is scheduled for Monday, the day Mr. Bush is to leave for his first stop, Spain. In an interview aboard Air Force One this week, Mr. Bush said he would seek to reassure the European allies that the United States was not abandoning them by shrinking into an isolationist shell. He also said he would try to allay their doubts about missile defense and impress upon them the correctness of his view.''There are some in Europe who worry about America becoming isolationists,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And I'll ease their concerns. We're an internationalist government.''He looks forward to ''making the case,'' he said, that missile defense is necessary in the post-cold-war era because ''we need to use our technologies to be able to develop ways to face down the post-cold-war threats.''The possible development of those technologies took a step forward today when the Pentagon's Ballistic Missile Defense Office announced that the next test of an interceptor ''kill vehicle,'' a major component of the missile defense system, would be conducted in mid- to late July, a year after the last test failed. Defense Department officials say that more than two dozen options are under consideration for initial deployment of missile defenses, and that no timetable exists for a decision by Mr. Bush. After Mr. Bush's visit to Spain, which was selected as the first stop in large part because the president speaks Spanish and because the administration sees Madrid as a ''center-right government,'' he will go on to Brussels, where he will address NATO. He will then travel to Goteborg, Sweden, for the United States-European Union summit meeting; fly to Poland, where he will deliver a major address on his vision of the American relationship with Europe; and then end up in Slovenia for his meeting with Mr. Putin. Mr. Bush said he would explain to Mr. Putin that the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty was no longer relevant. He will tell him that ''we don't need to be bound by a treaty that was signed when both of us viewed each other with hostility, and that we need to think differently.''Stressing the personal nature of the scheduled two-hour meeting with Mr. Putin in the Slovenian capital, Ljubljana, Mr. Bush said, ''It's very important for him to hear it from me and for me to hear from him.''The meeting with Mr. Putin is in fact a late add-on to a long-planned trip that is anchored to the United States-European Union summit meeting, a semiannual event that the White House wants to reduce to once a year because it regards the meetings as unproductive. The White House did not want to hold the meeting with Mr. Putin until later, perhaps as part of a summit meeting of seven industrialized nations and Russia in Genoa, Italy, in July. But persistent problems with China, including the American spy plane incident, officials said, made the administration reconsider the extent to which it wanted to keep Russia at arm's length. Further, in preparatory meetings for the president's trip, European officials made clear that one of the ways of diminishing the doubts in Europe about Mr. Bush was to signal that the administration could manage the relationship with Russia properly. Mr. Bush's aides said they had not laid out any major objectives for the meeting with Mr. Putin. ''We're not expecting major agreements here,'' Ms. Rice said in a briefing with reporters. ''What we really are doing here is establishing a foundation with these two presidents in their personal relationship that can help us to promote a constructive and realistic relationship with Russia.''Ms. Rice said that ''the new security framework'' would be the focus of the discussion with Mr. Putin but that other matters would be covered, including Chechnya, press freedom in Russia and Moscow's proliferation of missile technologies. Setting a more moderate tone toward Moscow than harsh remarks made by Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld just after he assumed office, Ms. Rice said, ''The president wants to signal his support for having a Russia that is really a part of Europe, that is a respected partner in international politics.''As administration officials laid out their game plan for Mr. Bush's journey, they stressed that things were not as bad between Washington and the allies as they might seem.''This is a relationship under some stress but by no means in crisis,'' said Richard Haass, the director of policy planning at the State Department. An administration team that went to Europe last month to describe the Bush ideas about missile defense prepared the way for the president's visit and allayed the basic fear that Washington would act unilaterally, Mr. Haass said. For his part, Mr. Bush noted in the interview this week that consultations were under way. ''One of the things we did on the missile defense issue is we sent high-ranking officials to consult and spend time with -- in various capitals -- on the issues, explaining our position,'' he said. ''There's a lot of give and take. And that's important.''The White House organized the missile defense briefings after failing to take such a course on the international treaty on global warming, known as the Kyoto Protocol.  The sudden announcement that the United States would not abide by the pact contributed to the image in Europe of a high-handed White House. At a meeting in Luxembourg on Friday, the European Union's environment ministers set the stage for a standoff on global warming at the summit meeting. The ministers said the European Union would press forward with final negotiations on the Kyoto Protocol so that ratification procedures could get under way. But the White House continued to signal this week that Mr. Bush did not plan to change course. Despite unanimous support for the pact that is expected to be expressed by the 15 members of the European Union in Sweden, the administration officials said there was no flexibility in their attitude toward the Kyoto proposals. They suggested that the administration might work up a set of principles on climate warming but that this would fall far short of any proposal to modify or renegotiate the pact, which requires mandatory emission reductions. Concerning the death penalty, which is outlawed in European Union nations, it is not on the formal agenda of the summit meeting. But Mr. Bush is still expected to hear much about it during a free-wheeling dinner discussion with European leaders. Ms. Rice, asked by reporters about the awkwardness of Mr. Bush's arriving in Europe when Mr. McVeigh's execution is expected to occur, said the use of the death penalty in the United States was no one else's business.''I believe that our allies probably understand that this is a matter for the American government,'' Ms. Rice said. ''It is a matter for America's democracy, not a matter for international negotiation.''

To the Editor:Re ''Panel Tells Bush Global Warming Is Getting Worse'' (front page, June 7):The overwhelming affirmation of the existence of global warming and its harmful consequences to people everywhere leave the Bush administration no recourse but to accept the Kyoto Protocol, the international treaty negotiated in 1997 that committed countries to fight warming. Because of the blizzard of scientific evidence at the highest levels that global warming is a reality, the United States is morally and humanistically, not to mention politically at home and abroad, obliged to join with the other signers of the protocol and move ahead toward ameliorating the problem. ROBERT PERLOFF  Pittsburgh, June 7, 2001

Barely three weeks after the White House issued President Bush's new energy blueprint, some top officials are backing away from its projections of how much coal, oil and gas the United States will burn in the years ahead. At the same time, they are preparing to announce new steps to address global warming, accepting the scientific evidence that warming is occurring because of human activities, including the burning of fossil fuels. The steps include spending programs meant to reduce energy consumption or increase the use of clean energy sources like wind and solar power. Administration officials said the  energy strategy, a 170-page document prepared over three months by a task force led by Vice President Dick Cheney, was a ''statement of reality'' rather than a vision of the nation's energy future. They said some of its most striking projections were intended to call people's attention to energy needs but not to predict how administration policies would ultimately affect energy production and use. The recasting of the energy policy is a response to criticism that it did not take into account the problem of global warming, a topic that European nations are expected to raise on the president's trip there next week. European leaders expressed alarm in March when Mr. Bush abandoned the Kyoto Protocol, an international treaty intended to curtail global warming. Mr. Bush plans to make a statement on Monday that reiterates his rejection of the Kyoto Protocol as ''fatally flawed in fundamental ways,'' but promises to work within the framework of United Nations environmental negotiations to come up with ''an effective and science based response,'' according to a summary of his statement that the White House circulated on Capitol Hill today. A copy was provided by the National Environmental Trust, an advocacy group that favors the Kyoto agreement. Mr. Bush will order cabinet agencies to develop ''creative ways'' of addressing the problem, ''drawing on the power of markets and technology,'' the summary said. I. Lewis Libby, Mr. Cheney's chief of staff, told environmentalists this week that the administration had miscommunicated some elements of the plan, said several people who attended a White House meeting to discuss the environment. Mr. Libby noted that the administration had relied on ''business as usual'' projections from the Energy Information Administration, part of the Department of Energy, to describe a critical energy shortfall. An example is Mr. Cheney's often repeated estimate that the nation will need at least 1,300 new power plants by 2020. But the Bush team did not intend to suggest that it agreed with the same agency's business-as-usual estimates of how all those new power plants would affect concentrations of the so-called greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.''Those numbers are sober projections,'' an administration official said. ''They are bad numbers that make people realize that we have to do something. It's a statement of reality, not a projection of where we would like to take things.''This appears to be a significant shift. When they unveiled their energy strategy in May, Mr. Bush, Mr. Cheney and other administration officials did not describe its projections in that way. A cabinet-level committee is still developing a global-warming strategy. But Mr. Bush's statement on Monday will reiterate that there are still some uncertainties in the science of climate projections, that developing countries must participate more fully in reducing emissions and that any plan must ensure continuing economic growth -- all signs of the administration's ambivalence. Mr. Bush is expected to eventually propose new money for research and development of global warming-related technologies, going beyond the roughly $10 billion in projected spending outlined in the energy plan. He will also call for more research into global warming itself. Some administration experts have also experimented with projections of future energy production and use to see how they would affect climate change. These include a potential doubling of nuclear power's share of electricity production, since those power plants emit no greenhouse gases, and a much greater emphasis on renewable energy, like wind and solar power. The Energy Information Administration projects that without policy changes, emissions of carbon dioxide, the main heat-trapping pollutant, will increase by about 35 percent by  2020. Though the statistics on energy production underlying that projection are scattered throughout the Bush team's energy report, the estimate of greenhouse gas emissions is not mentioned. The report focused mainly on increasing domestic supplies of energy to meet demand at moderate prices. It embraced the use of coal-fired power plants, which emit large amounts of carbon dioxide. It supported the use of renewable energy sources but used the Energy Information Administration's estimates to conclude that they would at best account for a tiny proportion of energy output in 2020. Critics argue that the strategy should have aggressively promoted new energy sources and conservation programs. Administration officials said that although they relied mainly on the information agency's numbers, they had always intended to find ways of reducing greenhouse gas emissions beyond what that agency projects. They said that some recommendations in the energy report -- tax credits for fuel-efficient vehicles and a push for more nuclear power, for example -- would reduce the use of fossil fuels below the projections of the energy agency.

When President Bush announces on Monday that he will seek millions of dollars for new research into the causes of global warming, and will try to renegotiate an international accord on the problem, it will mark yet another example of how global and domestic politics have forced him to back away from the hard-line pronouncements of his first five months in the White House. In retrospect, those months will likely be known as the anti-Clinton phase of the Bush presidency. Eager to show that the national enterprise is under new management, the president and his aides reflexively reached for positions that could be cast as the opposite of whatever came before. Now, in the words of one senior administration official, ''the realities of governing have begun to overwhelm the memories of campaigning.''On the vexing question of how to deal with a bankrupt and paranoid Communist government in North Korea; on the tricky politics of bailing out economically failing but strategically important nations, and on the perpetual issue of when America needs to push along the peace process in the Middle East, Mr. Bush is suddenly trimming back, changing his emphasis, and, in the end, coming up with solutions that have shades of the ancien regime.''I wouldn't say we are changing our views,'' one of his senior national security advisers insisted over the weekend. ''But it's fair to say that we are more careful in how we explain those views.''Perhaps so, but some officials say the change of tone also reflects an administration that is gradually learning the real-world complications of sole superpower status -- of what happens when allies push back, or demand American help. Mr. Bush himself, aides say, has been distressed by a stream of headlines and editorials suggesting that his call for a ''humble'' foreign policy is really camouflage for a president who expects the rest of the world to fall in line with his agenda. Mr. Bush is hardly the first president to discover that a president's options are not quite as wide as they appear while savaging the other party during a presidential campaign. Bill Clinton came to office denouncing former President George Bush's policy on Haiti, only to discover during his first crisis there that it made some sense. He accused the elder Mr. Bush of coddling dictators in China, and later became a far more articulate enthusiast of economic engagement with Beijing than his predecessor. That experience taught George W. Bush to tread lightly on economic engagement with China. But during the presidential debates, the younger Mr. Bush lambasted the Clinton administration for unwisely bailing out countries that ran their economies into the ground, saying that such actions created a ''moral hazard'' -- market jargon for sending the message around the world that the United States would help bail out other countries that dug themselves into an economic hole. In the first two cases that have cropped up -- economic crises in Turkey and Argentina -- the Bush administration decided to vote for bailouts at the International Monetary Fund. (It rejected pouring direct American aid into those countries, as Mr. Clinton did in the Mexican crisis in 1995.) The White House said almost nothing about the bailouts. But one senior official said that during the key meetings on the subject, Mr. Bush's new team came face to face with the question of what chaos in Turkey would mean to the political alliance against Saddam Hussein of Iraq, and what a meltdown in Argentina would do to Mr. Bush's hopes for a free-trade area of the Americas. Mr. Bush's statement on Monday on global warming, just a few hours before he leaves on his trip to Europe, is already shaping up as a classic example of saying the second time what the White House should have said the first time. When Mr. Bush rejected the global warming pact known as the Kyoto Protocol in March, he said the treaty was ''dead.'' His aides still think so -- the United States, they say, cannot abide a treaty that mandates reductions in American carbon dioxide emissions, especially at a moment that the administration is talking about building more coal-fired power plants to solve an energy shortage. But Mr. Bush's chief of staff, Andrew H. Card, said he was unhappy with how the administration conveyed that decision. So on Monday, Mr. Bush will announce that he agrees with a panel from the National Academy of Sciences that concluded last week that global warming was a real problem and that it was getting worse. He will ask the Commerce Secretary, Donald L. Evans to step up studies of the problem and announce his fidelity to a 1992 United Nations treaty that commits the United States to negotiating a solution with the rest of the world. No doubt that will not satisfy the Europeans. ''We just didn't have time to come up with specifics before the European trip,'' said one senior official involved in the cabinet-level review of the global warming problem. ''Our message will be that the only way to make this work is to come up with an agreement that can include the United States and developing nations.'' All that raises the question of why Mr. Bush failed to express a willingness to revisit the issue urgently two months ago. A similar issue surrounds the North Korea policy review. Mr. Bush used a visit by South Korea's president, Kim Dae Jung, to make the point that he did not trust North Korea's mysterious leader, Kim Jong Il. The statement left the impression that the new president thought it was a waste of time negotiating an accord with an untrustworthy Communist leader. The Republican right wing was overjoyed. Moderates, including former aides to the elder President Bush, were horrified, and began a lobbying campaign to convince Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, and her boss that there were not a lot of choices in how to deal with North Korea -- and that providing it with economic incentives to restrain its missile and nuclear programs made a lot of sense. Japan and South Korea said the same thing, and the European Union began to intervene, playing the role the United States once played.''It was inevitable that they would come out the same hole the Clinton folks did,'' said one senior career official involved in the announcement last week that, after a thorough review of Korea policy, Mr. Bush had decided to re-engage Pyongyang in talks on a wide range of issues. In the minds of many Korea experts outside the government -- and a few inside -- the decision put the new administration back to about where Mr. Clinton was in 1998.''The goal posts on issues like this are only so wide,'' said the senior official, a veteran of Asian strategic issues, holding his hands about a foot apart. ''You don't have as much running room as you think you do.''Ms. Rice defended the decision over the weekend, saying that ''two months ago there was a lot of skepticism about re-engagement, and the only way to make a decision we were comfortable with was to thoroughly review what was on the table. You need time. It doesn't make sense to proceed until everyone is comfortable with that decision.''Now, as Mr. Bush heads to Europe, he will have other opportunities to rethink early positions. The Middle East, where he sent Central Intelligence Director George J. Tenet last week after months of eschewing the use of special envoys, is likely to demand more of his attention. So are the Balkans. As one of his aides said this weekend, ''He's going to be making a lot of these decisions on the plane,'' between meetings with allies who are looking for reassurance that their views count, too.

Following are excerpts from remarks by President Bush today on global climate, as recorded by the White House:Climate change, with its potential to impact every corner of the world, is an issue that must be addressed by the world. The Kyoto Protocol was fatally flawed in fundamental ways. But the process used to bring nations together to discuss our joint response to climate change is an important one. That is why I am today committing the United States of America to work within the United Nations framework and elsewhere to develop with our friends and allies and nations throughout the world an effective and science-based response to the issue of global warming. My cabinet-level working group has met regularly for the last 10 weeks to review the most recent, most accurate and most comprehensive science. They have heard from scientists offering a wide spectrum of views. They have reviewed the facts, and they have listened to many theories and suppositions. The working group asked the highly respected National Academy of Sciences to provide us the most up-to-date information about what is known and about what is not known on the science of climate change. First, we know the surface temperature of the earth is warming. It has risen by six-tenths of 1 degree Celsius over the past 100 years. There was a warming trend from the 1890's to the 1940's, cooling from the 1940's to the 1970's, and then sharply rising temperatures from the 1970's to today. There is a natural greenhouse effect that contributes to warming. Greenhouse gases trap heat, and thus warm the earth, because they prevent a significant proportion of infrared radiation from escaping into space. Concentration of greenhouse gases, especially CO2 , have increased substantially since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. And the National Academy of Sciences indicates that the increase is due in large part to human activity. Yet the academy's report tells us that we do not know how much effect natural fluctuations in climate may have had on warming. We do not know how much our climate could or will change in the future. We do not know how fast change will occur or even how some of our actions could impact it. For example, our useful efforts to reduce sulfur emissions may have actually increased warming, because sulfate particles reflect sunlight, bouncing it back into space. And finally, no one can say with any certainty what constitutes a dangerous level of warming and, therefore, what level must be avoided. The policy challenge is to act in a serious and sensible way, given the limits of our knowledge. While scientific uncertainties remain, we can begin now to address the factors that contribute to climate change. There are only two ways to stabilize concentration of greenhouse gases. One is to avoid emitting them in the first place. The other is to try to capture them after they're created. And there are problems with both approaches. We're making great progress through technology, but have not yet developed cost-effective ways to capture carbon emissions at their source, although there is some promising work that is being done. And a growing population requires more energy to heat and cool our homes, more gas to drive our cars, even though we're making progress on conservation and energy efficiency and have significantly reduced the amount of carbon emissions per unit of G.D.P.Our country, the United States, is the world's largest emitter of man-made greenhouse gases. We account for almost 20 percent of the world's man-made greenhouse emissions. We also account for about one-quarter of the world's economic output. We recognize the responsibility to reduce our emissions. We also recognize the other part of the story -- that the rest of the world emits 80 percent of all greenhouse gases. And many of those emissions come from developing countries. This is a challenge that requires a 100 percent effort, ours and the rest of the world's. The world's second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases is China. Yet China was entirely exempted from the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol. India and Germany are among the top emitters. Yet India was also exempt from Kyoto. These and other developing countries that are experiencing rapid growth face challenges in reducing their emissions without harming their economies. We want to work cooperatively with these countries in their efforts to reduce greenhouse emissions and maintain economic growth. Kyoto also failed to address two major pollutants that have an impact on warming, black soot and tropospheric ozone. Both are proven health hazards. Reducing both would not only address climate change, but also dramatically improve people's health. Kyoto is, in many ways, unrealistic. Many countries cannot meet their Kyoto targets. The targets themselves were arbitrary and not based upon science. For America, complying with those mandates would have a negative economic impact, with layoffs of workers and price increases for consumers. And when you evaluate all these flaws, most reasonable people will understand that it's not sound public policy. That's why 95 members of the United States Senate expressed a reluctance to endorse such an approach. Yet America's unwillingness to embrace a flawed treaty should not be read by our friends and allies as any abdication of responsibility. To the contrary, my administration is committed to a leadership role on the issue of climate change. We recognize our responsibility and will meet it -- at home, in our hemisphere and in the world. My cabinet-level working group on climate change is recommending a number of initial steps, and will continue to work on additional ideas. . . . I also call on Congress to work with my administration to achieve the significant emission reductions made possible by implementing the clean-energy technologies proposed in our energy plan. Our working group study has made it clear that we need to know a lot more. The U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change commences to stabilizing concentrations at a level that will prevent dangerous human interference with the climate. But no one knows what that level is. The United States has spent $18 billion on climate research since 1990, three times as much as any other country, and more than Japan and all 15 nations of the E.U. combined. Today, I make our investment in science even greater. My administration will establish the U.S. Climate Change Research Initiative to study areas of uncertainty and identify priority areas where investments can make a difference. I'm directing my secretary of commerce, working with other agencies, to set priorities for additional investments in climate change research, review such investments, and to improve coordination amongst federal agencies. We will fully fund high-priority areas for climate change science over the next five years. We'll also provide resources to build climate observation systems in developing countries and encourage other developed nations to match our American commitment. And we propose a joint venture with the E.U., Japan and others to develop state-of-the-art climate modeling that will help us better understand the causes and impacts of climate change. America's the leader in technology and innovation. We all believe technology offers great promise to significantly reduce emissions, especially carbon-capture, -storage and -sequestration technologies. So we're creating the National Climate Change Technology Initiative to strengthen research at universities and national labs, to enhance partnerships in applied research, to develop improved technology for measuring and monitoring gross and net greenhouse gas emissions and to fund demonstration projects for cutting-edge technologies such as bioreactors and fuel cells. . . .Yet even that isn't enough. I've asked my advisers to consider approaches to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, including those that tap the power of markets, help realize the promise of technology and ensure the widest possible global participation.

President Bush's five-day trip to Europe this week is shaping up as an important test of his foreign affairs leadership. It is the first major journey abroad for one of our least-traveled modern presidents, and could thus give him a fuller and firsthand understanding of the leaders and issues animating the European Continent. It also comes at a time when European leaders are distressed by the administration's early go-it-alone style on issues ranging from missile defense planning to the Kyoto treaty on global warming. In a week that will include meetings with top NATO officials, a summit conference with leaders of the 15 European Union nations and an initial get-together with Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, Mr. Bush needs to set a steady, productive course for trans-Atlantic relations. That will require commitment to genuine consultation and cooperation with Europe on nuclear weapons strategy, missile defenses, relations with Russia, creation of a European defense force and environmental issues. Europeans have also been confused by the conflicting policy visions articulated by Secretary of State Colin Powell and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld on their recent trips to the Continent. The contrast between Secretary Powell's assurances of serious consultation on mutual security issues and Mr. Rumsfeld's exhortations to fall in line behind Washington's nuclear leadership have left European leaders wondering who really speaks for this administration. Mr. Bush needs to make clear that he stands behind General Powell's wiser approach. In its first months, the Bush administration has clearly signaled its intention to break with Clinton administration policies on arms control and the environment. But it has largely neglected the kind of consultations with allies and Congressional Democrats that will be needed to win support for alternate approaches. With the Senate now under Democratic leadership, Mr. Bush will be obliged to pay more attention to his domestic critics. He needs to be similarly attentive to restive allies. Europe is understandably concerned by Mr. Rumsfeld's calls for Washington to abandon the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty with Russia to allow broader testing and early construction of a defensive missile shield. Such haste could unravel the whole structure of existing arms control treaties. It makes far more sense to continue abiding by the ABM treaty while trying to negotiate a new agreement with Moscow permitting limited missile defenses. With no technology that can reliably shoot down enemy missiles yet available, there is no compelling need to cast off the ABM treaty now. European leaders are also dismayed at Mr. Bush's overly passive approach to global warming. They could not have been pleased by his comments yesterday. He displayed a more nuanced grasp of the issue than he had before, and Europe could take some comfort from his pledge to assume a ''leadership role'' in seeking a global solution. But he committed the United States to little more than further study of a problem that has already been extensively researched. If anything, he was more critical of the Kyoto accord on global warming than when he renounced it in March. Regrettably, he showed no signs of reviving his campaign pledge to impose caps on emissions of carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas. Mr. Bush needs to listen carefully to the concerns of European leaders on these and other issues and recognize that American leadership is most effective when exercised in concert with Europe, not in opposition to it.

In his speech on climate yesterday, President Bush said that a basic problem with the Kyoto Protocol, the proposed international pact for curtailing global warming, was that it laid out a timetable for cutting releases of heat-trapping gases before the threat posed by a buildup of those gases was clearly understood. But while many scientists and experts on risk management agreed in interviews yesterday that much remained unknown about the potential impact of rising temperatures, they took issue with the idea that this uncertainty justified further delay in acting to limit climate change.''There will be deep uncertainty in the climatic future for a long time,'' said Dr. Michael E. Schlesinger, who directs climate research at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. ''But if you wait until it's diminished to some threshold that you assign and then learn that the problem is severe, it may be too late to do anything about it.''Indeed, to many experts embroiled in the climate debate, the question of how much warming is too much -- which has been at the center of international climate negotiations for a decade -- now constitutes a red herring. They say it is more important to start from the point of widest agreement -- that rising concentrations of heat-trapping gases are warming the atmosphere, and that adding a lot more is probably a bad idea. The next step, they say, is to adopt policies that will soon flatten the rising arc on graphs of global emissions while also pursuing more research to clarify the risks. Many note that recent studies suggest a fairly high risk of significant ecological harm from a global temperature rise of less than 1 degree Fahrenheit and of substantial coastal flooding and agricultural disruption if temperatures rise more than 4 or 5 degrees in the new century. Global temperatures have risen 1 degree Fahrenheit in the last 50 years; since the last Ice Age, they have risen about 9 degrees. The risks are clear enough to justify some investments now in emissions controls, they say. They say that the general quandary is no different from the kind faced by town officials who must judge how much road salt to buy based on uncertain long-term winter weather forecasts, or by countries deciding whether to invest in a missile defense system that might not ever have to shoot down a missile.''It's silly to expect that we can resolve what the future is going to be,'' said Dr. Roger A. Pielke Jr., a mathematician and political scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo.  ''That's like trying to do economic policy by asking competing economists what level the stock market is going to be at 20 years from now.''World leaders, he and other experts say, would do better to embrace the notion that the future holds a murky mix of risks, both environmental and economic, but both can be lessened by actions taken now. Increasingly, experts with diverse viewpoints on the extent of the climate risk agree on a general solution: policies that reduce emissions, coupled with intensified climate research and monitoring, and policies created with sufficient flexibility that they can be intensified or relaxed as the warming trend's causes and consequences become clearer.''This is such a big problem, it's so long-term, with uncertainties that are so substantial, that at every stage you have to learn and adjust,'' said Dr. Michael Oppenheimer, senior scientist for Environmental Defense, a private conservation group. A similar view is held by Dr. Robert J. Lempert, a senior scientist and expert in risk analysis at the RAND Corporation, a nonprofit research institute based in Santa Monica, Calif., that has for decades studied risk strategies for the Pentagon and other government institutions.''Scientists aren't any time soon going to give politicians some magic answer,'' he said. ''Policy makers for a long, long time are going to have to deal with a situation where it's not clear what the costs and benefits are, where lots of people disagree about them, and they can't wait until everything is resolved.''There is plenty to study in the meantime about aspects of the dizzyingly complex puzzle that is the atmosphere, many scientists said. They said Mr. Bush was correct to allude in his speech to the idea that  atmospheric temperatures might have been altered because of efforts to reduce pollution from smokestacks and tailpipes, most notably particles of sulfur dioxide, which contribute to acid rain, and of soot.''We're clearly interfering with climate in a variety of ways, with aerosols on the one hand and gases on the other,'' said Dr. James E. Hansen, the director of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, a climate modeling center in Manhattan run by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Dr. Hansen has briefed the Bush administration twice on the issue, focusing on the possibility of cleaning up releases of soot and methane, which both have a warming influence on the atmosphere, first, and moving to cuts in carbon dioxide, which is released by burning oil and coal, when technological advances make that change cheaper.

INTERNATIONALA3-14Bush Maintains Opposition To Global Warming Accord  President Bush made clear that he had no intention of reversing his opposition to the Kyoto climate accord supported by the European leaders he is to meet with this week. And he strongly suggested that any new accord must also bind developing nations, especially China and India, to the kind of commitments that would be made by the United States. A1Israeli-Palestinian Talks  Security officials from both sides met for four hours but failed to reach an agreement on an American proposal that would extend the fragile and partial 10-day-old cease-fire, according to a Palestinian official involved. The official also said that C.I.A. Director George J. Tenet, who mediated, had told negotiators that he was uncertain that he would be willing to continue the talks. The toll of the violence rose with the death of a 5-month-old Israeli, Yehuda Haim Shoham, who was injured last week by Palestinian stone throwers. A10NATO Detentions in Kosovo  International peacekeepers said they detained 19 men over the weekend on suspicion of belonging to the ethnic Albanian rebel army fighting government forces in Macedonia. A10U.N. Drug Director Faulted  Internal investigations of the United Nations Office of Drug Control and Crime Prevention in Vienna found that poor management by the program's executive director, Pino Arlacchi, was costing the office money and talent, leaving the staff demoralized and in the dark. A5Filipino Rebels Report Execution  Muslim rebels said they had killed an American hostage, Guillermo Sobero of Corona, Calif., one of the three dozen foreign and Filipino captives whom they hold. The military cautioned that the group had lied about such killings in the past. A7Australian to Visit U.S.  Prime Minister John Howard, who has backed the Bush administration on Taiwan, the environment and missile defense, will visit Washington in September.(Reuters) World BriefingA14NATIONALA22-30Death Sentence Is Fulfilled For Oklahoma City Bomber  Timothy J. McVeigh, 33, was put to death by injection in the federal prison in Terre Haute, Ind., in a procedure watched in person and on closed-circuit television by some survivors and relatives of victims. He made no final remarks but issued a statement quoting the 1875 poem ''Invictus.'' He was the first federal prisoner executed since 1963. A1High-Tech Snooping Barred  The Supreme Court ruled, 5 to 4, that police use of a thermal imaging device to detect patterns of heat coming from a private home is a search that requires a warrant. The court said the requirement would also apply to any systems that let the police gain knowledge that in the past would have required physical entry. A1Forecast for Social Security  The co-chairmen of President Bush's Social Security commission said they would probably have to propose politically difficult steps like raising the retirement age and reducing cost of living adjustments to restore the system's long-term financial health. A1No Checks in the Mail  More than one-quarter of American adults will not get an income tax rebate this year. Nearly 40 percent will not get the full $300 for individuals or $600 for couples. The main reason is that after deductions, exemptions and credits, those people paid little or nothing in income taxes. A24Ethanol Rule to Be Enforced  The Bush administration decided California must use ethanol as an antipollution fuel additive, a move critics say may push pump prices up 5 cents a gallon this summer in California and in northeastern states, which were ready to seek an exemption if California's had been granted. A22A Kennedy Stays on the Sideline  Maxwell Taylor Kennedy, the 36-year-old son of Robert F. Kennedy, said he would not seek the House seat held by Joe Moakley, who died of leukemia last month and had planned to retire after the current term. Mr. Kennedy, a lawyer who heads a nonprofit environmental group, cited family considerations. A22NEW YORK/REGIONB1-6U.S. Bribery Investigation Of a Lauder Company  A company owned by Ronald S. Lauder, the cosmetics heir and former New York City mayoral candidate, who has worked to build a media empire in Eastern Europe, is under federal investigation because of accusations that it paid at least $1 million in bribes to Ukrainian officials for a television license. B1Anger in the Bronx  Some Longwood residents played videotape that they said showed police officers overreacting to disturbances on Sunday night, after the National Puerto Rican Day Parade. B1SPORTSD1-8EDUCATIONRuling on Schools and Religion  The Supreme Court, ruling 6 to 3 in a New York case, said public schools must open their doors to after-school religious activities, including those that involve young children, on the same basis as any other after-hours activity that school policy permits. A1New High School for Manhattan  The Board of Education will create an old-fashioned neighborhood high school, once thought an endangered species, on the Upper East Side. B1FASHIONB7ARTSE1-10SCIENCE TIMESF1-12Solar Flare Radiation Risk  Scientists say there may be a cause for concern about radiation exposure for people who fly at high altitudes during solar ''storm seasons,'' like the one occurring now, when solar flares intensify the solar winds. F1Health & FitnessF6BUSINESS DAYC1-16Fewer Making House Payments  The number of Americans behind on their mortgage payments has risen sharply in the last year, suggesting to some analysts that many new homeowners, who were part of a celebrated surge in house-buying during the last decade, may not be able to afford their mortgages during slow economic times, with energy costs and unemployment rising. A1New Windows Phone System  Microsoft's new Windows XP operating system for PC's, which is to be made commercially available on Oct. 25, includes software intended to greatly expand the ability to make telephone calls -- and find phone numbers -- over the Internet. A1Warnaco Files for Bankruptcy  The apparel company filed for Chapter 11 protection, blaming the economy and its heavy debt load, among other things, for its problems. Warnaco sells brands like Speedo, Calvin Klein and Chaps by Ralph Lauren. C1Business DigestC1World BusinessW1OBITUARIESA31EDITORIALA32-33Editorials: Mr. Bush's European debut; proselytizing in the schools; solutions for gridlock at La Guardia.  Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins. CrosswordE8  TV ListingsE9  Public LivesB2WeatherD8

President Bush hinted that he would not sign any global warming pact that did not include India and ChinaPresident Bush made clear today that he had no intention of reversing his opposition to a global warming accord supported by the European leaders he will meet with this week. And he strongly suggested that any new accord would have to bind developing nations, especially China and India, to the kind of commitments that would be made by the United States. In an effort to mollify his European critics in the hours before he left for Spain tonight on his first trip to Europe as president, Mr. Bush acknowledged the severity of the global warming problem and said the United States would ''lead the way by advancing the science on climate change.'' He described several new research initiatives that could mark a potentially significant focusing of American climate study. But while suggesting a new approach to the issue of global warming, Mr. Bush remained firm in rejecting the 1997 Kyoto accord, noting that it set no standards for major emitters of greenhouse gases, like China and India, while creating mandates for the United States that could prove economically crippling. His aides further argued that the accord -- aimed at reducing emissions of greenhouse gases below 1990 levels -- was written to make it easier for Europe than for the United States to meet the goals. Mr. Bush's outright rejection of the treaty two months ago led to an uproar in Europe. While unapologetic about their decision to back away from the accord, White House officials concede that they did a poor job of explaining their objections or their approach to the problem of reducing heat-trapping gases. So today, Mr. Bush stepped into the Rose Garden with several of his cabinet members and publicly embraced a recent report from the National Academy of Sciences that concluded that temperatures are rising because of human activities. At the same time, he insisted that his rejection of the Kyoto protocol ''should not be read by our friends and allies as any abdication of responsibility.''''We will act, learn and act again, adjusting our approaches as science  advances and technology evolves,''  he said. [Excerpts, Page A12. ]In essence, Mr. Bush was arguing that the market should be allowed to solve the problem, with the United States pushing along research ''consistent with the long-term goal of stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere.''While advocating an attack on the problem of the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the president once again rejected the mandates in the Kyoto treaty that the United States and other developed nations cut their emission levels of those gases to well below 1990 levels, a move he said would be economically disastrous for the United States and the world. He offered no concrete alternatives to the Kyoto cutbacks, however, beyond research and the gradual application of new technology. And he reiterated his longstanding pledge that he would not agree to any accord that exempts the developing world. ''The world's second largest emitter of greenhouse gases is China,'' Mr. Bush said, with Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell at his side. ''Yet China was entirely exempted from the requirements of the Kyoto protocol. India and Germany are among the top emitters. Yet India was also exempt from Kyoto.''Mr. Bush omitted any direct criticism of Europe, even though his aides have been saying, publicly and privately, that the members of the European Union have deliberately manipulated the debate -- and unfairly caricatured Mr. Bush as an enemy of good environmental practice -- to cover up their political problems coming into compliance with the Kyoto mandates. Andrew Card, Mr. Bush's chief of staff, told reporters over lunch here today that the target of cutting greenhouse emissions to below 1990 levels was picked with ''Machiavellian intent'' because it enabled them to count in East Germany just before its economy was collapsing. One result is that Europe must now cut its emissions far less than the United States does, he argued. Mr. Card argued that Mr. Bush had taken a courageous position that other nations would eventually come to appreciate. ''The emperor of Kyoto was running around the stage for a long time naked,'' he said, ''and it took President Bush to say, 'He doesn't have any clothes on.' ''Mr. Bush's statement today only seemed to fuel his disagreements with Europe, even as it was intended to tamp them down. ''Everyone will be polite this week, I'm sure,'' said a senior European diplomat here, ''but the standard everyone will be holding him to is how this stacks up against Kyoto. Where is the target? What is the U.S. timetable?''Moreover, he has probably re-ignited the dispute with the developing world. China, for instance, has managed to reduce its emissions significantly in the last few years, and it argues that the United States has done comparatively little. Chinese officials have already said they view efforts to force stricter controls as part of a move to contain Chinese economic power. Just as China and India have rejected limiting their economic potential by imposing strict environmental standards, Mr. Bush made clear today that he would not agree to any environmental limits that would slow the economy of either the United States or the world.''We account for almost 20 percent of the man-made greenhouse emissions,'' he said. ''We also account for about one-quarter of the world's economic output. We recognize the responsibility to reduce our emissions.''But he added that ''we also recognize the other part of the story,'' saying the targets in the Kyoto treaty would ''have a negative economic impact, with layoffs of workers and price increases for consumers.''Mr. Bush's statement was dismissed by a range of environmental groups as an effort to evade the issue by promising new scientific initiatives, but leaving unclear how much he was willing to spend, or how long the studies should take. While Mr. Bush called for a ''national climate change technology initiative'' today, former members of the Clinton administration said it bore great resemblance to a $4.5 billion, five-year program they proposed four years ago. Congress never fully financed it, and Mr. Bush's recent budget did not support it.''It's very weak tea,'' said David B. Sandalow, the former assistant secretary of state for oceans, environment and science and one of the negotiators of the Kyoto protocol in the last administration. Mr. Sandalow, now a senior fellow at the World Resources Institute, said, ''If you were trying to develop a strategy to make sure China and India would not cooperate, you couldn't develop a better one than what Mr. Bush announced today.''What was striking about today's statement, though, was Mr. Bush's extensive discussion of the issue, and his commitment to do something about it -- even as he swathed the specifics in a cloud of ambiguities. He characterized global warming as a serious long-range problem but one whose dimensions were still too little understood. He tacitly acknowledged that the United States' rejection of the Kyoto accord had estranged the United States from many nations with which it has good relations generally. Accordingly, Mr. Bush said he would push for new efforts to study global warming and more coordination among research institutions. He called for more money to pay for research into ways to control greenhouse gases. If some of the president's statements today about technology and America's own advances sounded familiar, it may be because it had echoes of his father's speech nine years ago this week at a major environmental conference in Rio de Janeiro that set the stage for the Kyoto negotiations.''Let's face it, there has been some criticism of the United States,'' the first President Bush said at the time. ''But I must tell you, we come to Rio proud of what we have accomplished and committed to extending the record on American leadership on the environment. In the United States, we have the world's tightest air quality standards on cars and factories, the most advanced laws for protecting lands and waters, and the most open processes for public participation.''He added, ''Now for a simple truth: America's record on environmental protection is second to none.''In the years since, the United States has continued to support research and new technology and to push for limits on automobile exhaust and factory emissions. By repeating his fidelity today to negotiating with other nations under the 1992 climate treaty signed by his father, Mr. Bush is essentially trying to reset the clock, arguing that Kyoto should be scrapped in favor of a new, market-based accord that did not impose such an onerous economic cost. But it is far from clear that he can win any converts to that position. Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, a nonpartisan group that works with many large corporations seeking to scale back their emissions, said today that she was ''confused'' about Mr. Bush's political goal.''He is meeting with Europeans who are doing some very ambitious things to reduce emissions,'' she said. ''Yet what we don't have from him is something that talks about how you go about reducing emissions.''Some of that, Bush administration officials said, is contained in his energy report, issued last month. Mr. Bush, for instance, called for the increased use of nuclear power, because it emits no greenhouse gases. In a sign of how far apart he and the Europeans are, Germany today reached an agreement with its utilities to phase out the use of nuclear power, in part because of the growing problem of disposing of nuclear waste. Although this will be Mr. Bush's first trip to Europe since taking office, White House aides said today that the president, who critics have said has had little exposure to foreign countries, has made several previous trips to the region. A White House spokesman, Gordon Johndroe, said Mr. Bush had been to the Britain at least three times, most recently in 1990, when he also visited Spain, Portugal and Morocco. He also said Mr. Bush had visited France, though no date was provided.

To the Editor:Re ''President Facing Skeptical Europe on Trip This Week'' (front page, June 11):As a Texan, I am not surprised by the ''growing gap in values'' between the United States and European countries on social issues, as well as the Antiballistic Missile Treaty, the Kyoto protocol on global warming, land mines, missile defense and so on. There may be many Americans, perhaps a majority, who are also dismayed by the ''gap in values'' between themselves and this administration. I for one am hoping that the Europeans can impress their concerns upon our new president and persuade him to reconsider his positions on these issues. EVELYN CHORUSH  Houston, June 11, 2001

One of the more contentious issues President Bush is discussing with European leaders during his trip this week is his stance on global warming. When Mr. Bush decided to abandon the Kyoto Protocol -- because of its ostensibly unrealistic targets and the pressures it would put on American industry and private households -- he generated a worldwide backlash, particularly among European allies. With good reason: A closer look at the numbers shows that if the economy of the United States operated as efficiently as those of Europe and Japan, American energy consumption and greenhouse emissions would fall dramatically -- to even less than the emission levels envisioned in the Kyoto treaty. It is well known that the United States consumes more energy than the size of its economy or its share of the world population would suggest. Specifically, the United States produces 22 percent of the world's gross domestic product but uses 25 percent of the world's energy -- and in doing so also accounts for 25 percent of global emissions of carbon dioxide. In contrast, the European Union accounts for 20 percent of world G.D.P. while consuming only 16 percent of the world's energy. Proportionately, the numbers for Japan are similar to Europe's. What these figures boil down to is that for every dollar's worth of goods and services the United States produces, it consumes 40 percent more energy than other industrialized nations. To be sure, unique factors, like the greater geographic distances in the United States, account for some of the higher energy usage. But according to the United States Energy Information Agency, only about 25 percent of American energy usage is for transportation, so something much more significant than geography is at work here. The fact of the matter is that if, from an energy policy perspective, the United States economy operated as efficiently as those of Europe and Japan, American energy consumption would fall by about 30 percent. In that case, United States carbon emissions might be expected to fall to the European rate per dollar of G.D.P. --  a 35 percent drop. If America had achieved European levels of efficiency in the 1990's, it would by now already exceed its Kyoto target for 2012, which was to be 7 percent below its 1990 carbon dioxide emissions. In 1999 emissions would have been about 22 percent below the Kyoto goal. Moreover, the American appetite for energy will only become more of a problem in the future. No boost in domestic energy production will suffice to keep up with the projected growth in American demand over the next 20 years. The Energy Information Agency estimates that American demand for natural gas will rise by 62 percent, for electricity by 45 percent and for oil by 33 percent over that period. Where will all of this energy come from? American domestic oil production has been falling over the past 30 years, largely because the relatively cheap oil has been pumped. Opening areas like Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling will provide only a slight -- and temporary -- change in this very long-term trend. Simply put, the oil to support ever-expanding energy use is just not there. Nor will it be possible for the United States to continue to make up its shortfall with oil from abroad. International supplies of energy will be increasingly scarce as China and India, the two most populous nations, are likely to continue growing at rates of 5 percent to 10 percent a year, with energy consumption expected to increase at substantial rates. Increasing scarcity and rising prices could thus be a real long-term threat to United States economic growth. For the past decade, the United States has grown faster than any other nation in the G-7 group of industrial countries. As the world's largest economy and the global leader in the economic as well as political realm, it needs to assume leadership on environmental matters, too. It can do so by creating a framework of incentives that will increase the energy efficiency of its economy to match that of Europe or Japan. This is important not just to ensure the future health of the American economy, but also to send a signal to less developed nations. These countries have little choice but to generate higher levels of pollution for the time being, largely as an inevitable result of their limited access to capital and modern technology. However, this excuse does not apply to the United States, which has a responsibility to demonstrate that a country need not ignore its environmental responsibilities to remain an economic leader. Europe -- and the world -- can only hope that President Bush is serious about making the United States a leader in dealing wisely with energy. Norbert Walter is chief economist for Deutsche Bank Group.

Following are excerpts from a news conference by President Bush and Prime Minister Jos Mara Aznar after their talks yesterday in Madrid, as recorded by Federal News Service Inc. Prime Minister Aznar's remarks were provided by a interpreter. Q. (TO MR. BUSH) -- The E.U. today rejected your global warming initiative, Mr. President, and weeks of consultations have not eased objections to your missile defense plans in most European capitals. I have two questions on that. Are these issues so important that you're willing to go it alone if the European allies won't come on board? And what is your response to the E.U. today calling your climate change plan short on results? PRESIDENT BUSH -- Well, first, there's a lot that unites us -- trade, common values, great opportunities. I look forward to making my case, as I did today over lunch, about missile defense. It starts with explaining to Russia and our European friends and allies that Russia is not the enemy of the United States, that the attitude of mutually assured destruction is a relic of the cold war and that we must address the new threats of the 21st century if we're to have a peaceful continent and a peaceful world. Those new threats are terrorism, based upon the capacity of some countries to develop weapons of mass destruction and therefore hold the United States and our friends hostage. . . .As far as global warming, I made a strong statement yesterday that said our nation is concerned about CO2 emissions and that we've begun the process to address that problem. I started with an energy plan that on the one hand talks about conservation measures. Our country can and will do a better job of conserving energy. But I also talked about new supplies that will not harm the environment -- renewables, natural gas and clean nuclear energy. And I hope the United States Congress responds positively to these measures, which will help in the global warming issue. I also said our nation is willing to continue to spend money on science, to make sure that any collective approach is one based upon sound science. I did speak out against the Kyoto Treaty itself because I felt the Kyoto Treaty was unrealistic, was not based upon science. The stated mandates in the Kyoto Treaty would affect our economy in a negative way. On the other hand, I did say loud and clear that we must continue the process of dialogue. . . .PRIME MINISTER AZNAR -- It's absolutely understandable for any president to be concerned about the security of his citizens, and in this particular case, obviously, there is a concern that's shared as a result of the collective security that we share. I sincerely believe that no one should be surprised that when we pose issues based on overcoming the past of the cold war, policies going beyond the cold war, presentations that go beyond the historical conflict of the cold war, and we talk about new threats, new challenges, new problems, new challenges in general, again, in security we come to new initiatives. . . .With regard to the second issue, on the environment, as you know, Spain continues to support the position of E.U., and it has ratified the Kyoto Protocol. I understand that we have positions that may have some differences, but . . . President Bush has adopted some initiatives, and those initiatives need to be studied by the E.U. . . .Q. (TO MR. BUSH) -- About your decision to withdraw from the Kyoto Protocol. . . . Do you agree that the European view on this is colored more by emotion than by science, and do you think that there is some hint of posturing in some of their criticism? . . .PRESIDENT BUSH -- I believe the Kyoto Treaty is a flawed treaty. I think that it set unscientific goals. It didn't include developing countries. On the other hand, I want to reiterate today, and I will do so throughout the week, that we're committed to reducing greenhouse gases in the United States. I had the opportunity to explain to the president that our nation faces an energy crisis, and it's a serious issue. We've got incredible trading opportunities between our nations and between the United States and the E.U. In order for us to be active traders, our nation's economy must recover. We've taken some steps toward that. We've got a sound monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. We've got a new fiscal stimulus package that is going to take effect soon. But we also must address energy, and we can do so in a way that not only enhances our economy, a way that makes us less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil and a way, as well, that helps clean the environment. . . .Q. -- I would like to ask President Bush how will this commitment that you have taken on to help Spain in the fight against terrorism be translated? What can the United States do? How can the United States provide any assistance, bearing in mind that in Spain our ethical principles do not allow us to apply the solution that you apply, the death penalty, for terrorists. . . .PRESIDENT BUSH -- Freedom-loving people are going to be faced with terrorism, and countries such as ours must not yield, must not waiver in the face of terrorist activity. And to the extent that we can help the government of Spain to fight terrorism within its borders, we will do so. . . .Q. (TO MR. BUSH) -- You say the scientific evidence isn't strong enough to go forward with Kyoto. So how then do you justify your missile defense plan when there is even less scientific evidence that that will work? PRESIDENT BUSH -- Part of the problem with the ABM Treaty is that it prevents a full exploration of possibility. We're bound by a treaty signed in 1972 that prohibits the United States from investigating all possibilities as to how to intercept missiles. For example, the technology of intercept-on-launch is a technology that we must more fully explore in order to make sure that we have the defensive capabilities necessary to prevent what I call blackmail. So part of the reason we're having the dialogue in the first place is to enable us to explore all our options. . . .The ABM Treaty is a relic of the past. It prevents freedom-loving people from exploring the future, and that's why we've got to lay it aside, and that's why we've got to have the framework, the discussions necessary to explain to our friends and allies, as well as Russia, that our intent is to make the world more peaceful, not more dangerous.

President Bush today began his first overseas trip since taking office with his most fervent pitch yet for his plan to build a missile defense shield, dismissing a 1972 arms treaty that stands in the way as obsolete and irrelevant to a post-cold-war world.''The ABM treaty is a relic of the past,'' Mr. Bush said here this afternoon, referring to the Antiballistic Missile Treaty, signed by Washington and Moscow. ''The days of the cold war have ended, and so must the cold war mentality, as far as I'm concerned.''The president was equally emphatic about his opposition to a global warming accord supported by European leaders. Just a few hours after environment ministers from the European Union said the president's latest vow to cut greenhouse emissions was unacceptable, Mr. Bush branded the 1997 accord, known as the Kyoto Protocol, ''unrealistic'' and ''not based on sound science.''He said that trying to adhere to it would harm an ailing American economy, and he made a fresh argument that Europeans should be concerned about that because of trade with the United States.''In order for us to be active traders, our nation's economy must recover,'' Mr. Bush said as he stood next to Prime Minister Jos Mara Aznar of Spain at a news conference here. [Excerpts, Page A20. ]Mr. Bush indeed found in Mr. Aznar someone publicly eager to shower him with praise and reassurance. At the news conference, held in a garden outside Moncloa Palace, Mr. Aznar's residence, the Spanish prime minister expressed interest in the promise of a missile shield and issued what seemed to be a gentle rebuke to other Europeans.''What I'm surprised by is the fact that there are people who, from the start, disqualified this initiative,'' Mr. Aznar said, adding that ''what we're dealing with here is an attempt to provide greater security for everyone.''Mr. Bush's aim for his first presidential visit to Europe is to assure apprehensive leaders here that his foreign policy will not be unilateral, that he is listening to their concerns and that he considers the alliance between the United States and Europe as vital and important as ever. And he carried with him a general message of cooperation, saying time and again that the goals that bound the United States and Europe were stronger than any differences of opinion.''There's so much more that unites us than divides us,'' Mr. Bush said, pledging to consult and try to work with European allies on all issues of shared concern. ''We share common values. We trade together. We work on security matters together. And I refuse to let any issue isolate America from Europe.''But his appeal for a missile shield and his unwavering rejection of the Kyoto accord put the spotlight on two areas of serious contention between him and European leaders. As Mr. Bush toured the royal palace here this morning and later talked for more than three hours with Mr. Aznar, he was taking his biggest step yet onto the world stage, where he is relatively untested and, according to administration officials, largely misunderstood. It was intended to be a cautious start to a five-day, five-country diplomatic mission that will continue with a NATO meeting in Belgium on Wednesday and conclude in a meeting with Russian President Vladimir V. Putin in Slovenia on Saturday. Spain's government is more conservative than most others in Europe. Its leaders were more likely to be flattered by Mr. Bush's attentions than their counterparts in some other countries. Mr. Bush speaks some Spanish, which he sprinkled repeatedly in his remarks today. And he was not as apt to be greeted here by the kinds of protests expected elsewhere on his tour. Only about 400 demonstrators gathered outside the American Embassy in Madrid tonight, toting posters that read ''Bush, imbecile, the world is not your ranch'' and ''Europe rejects a wild Bush-man,'' and they were easily kept in check by hundreds of police officers. In a joint statement that Mr. Bush and Mr. Aznar released just before their news conference, the leaders agreed on the need for a ''comprehensive security strategy that encompasses both offensive and defensive deterrent systems.'' It was as unspecific as the proposed architecture for the shield, and it stopped short of an outright endorsement of the plan by the Spanish prime minister. Before the news conference, Mr. Bush spent the bulk of his time with Mr. Aznar at the prime minister's country retreat in the Toledo Mountains, a getaway similar in spirit to Mr. Bush's ranch in Crawford, Tex. As the two leaders talked and walked the grounds, neither wore a tie or suit jacket. All in all, the visit seemed perfectly tailored to Mr. Bush's informal tastes, a recipe for a relaxed entry into European politics. Mr. Bush has not always been so sturdy when discussing world affairs and uttering foreign words. On Monday, in an interview with Spanish state television, he mispronounced Mr. Aznar's last name, transposing the middle consonants and saying ''Anzar.''There were no such glaring mistakes today, but at the news conference, Mr. Bush was initially soft-voiced and a little stiff, tamping down his usual ebullience to the point where he seemed somewhat tentative. Later, as he expressed his resolve on the missile shield and what he saw as serious flaws in the Kyoto accord, his manner grew more animated and forceful. Before leaving the United States, Mr. Bush had sought to allay European fears about the Bush administration's efforts to fight global warming by promising to lead the way on the research and development of technologies that would reduce emissions. But Mr. Bush did not tether himself to anything concrete. Several European environment ministers made clear that they were unimpressed.''Abandoning the Kyoto Protocol would mean postponing international action to combat climate change for years, and we are already late,'' said Environment Minister Kjell Larsson of Sweden, which currently holds the European Union presidency, in a statement. ''We cannot accept this.''Mr. Bush's aides later conceded that while they believed that they were making enormous headway in softening any European resistance to a missile shield, the disagreement over the Kyoto protocol was more severe and less easily resolved. One administration official offered a glimpse into the administration's belief that the European proponents of Kyoto were, for political purposes, articulating a lofty vision that was not realistically attainable.''I wish I were that pure again,'' the official said sarcastically. ''I wish I could be Swedish.'' Mr. Bush's aides further argue that the accord -- aimed at reducing emissions of greenhouse gases below 1990 levels -- was written to make it easier for Europe than for the United States to meet the goals. Another division of opinion between Europe and the United States exists over the death penalty. The execution on Monday of Timothy J. McVeigh virtually guaranteed that Mr. Bush would take a question about his support for capital punishment. He told the Spanish journalist who asked him that the death penalty was the democratic consensus of the American people, who he said ''believe that if the death penalty is certain, just and fair, it will deter crime.''Mr. Bush explained that he saw the missile shield as a necessary defense against smaller countries that acquired weapons of mass destruction, not as part of a new arms race, and that people who dismissed its potential utility were ignoring the changing nature of the world.

Talk about Goofy meets Goya. W.'s in Spain consulting with the prime minister about the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, and I'm here giving the commencement address to the high school seniors at Sidwell Friends, telling them how I used to be the next president. Ho-la! What is WRONG with this picture? All that guy knows about my issue is that the acid rain in Spain falls mainly on the plain. Does he know that Kyoto was founded as Heiankyo in A.D. 794? (Sigh) Does he know that Kyoto is the home of 20 percent of Japan's national treasures and 15 percent of its important cultural properties, as well as 17 temples and shrines designated as World Heritage Sites by Unesco in 1994? (Big sigh) I can't believe he's treating his first presidential trip like ''National Lampoon's European Vacation.'' He finally gets to go to Europe and he's not even hitting Europe. Europe is France, England and Germany, n'est-ce pas? W.'s going to Spain, Poland, Sweden and that other hotbed of intrigue and international tension, Brussels, to sign the all-important Godiva Accord of 2001. Not exactly the big powers, Boy George!I'd be off to Germany to wrest control of the future of Europe from the Bundesbank. I'd be off to France to tell Chirac just who's in charge of this alliance. I'd be off to England to help Tony Blair cure foot-and-mouth disease, fix the National Health Service and put an end to fox hunting, once and for all. It's pathetic the way they arrange his whole illegitimate presidency to cater to his teensy interests. He starts with glad-handing in Spain so he can show off his mangled Spanish. I spoke Spanish during the campaign, too. I told folks that oportunidad is not just a palabra. W. thinks Madrid is El Paso East. He thought there'd be a mariachi band at the airport. He's over there asking Queen Sofia for her chalupa recipe. He went to the Prado to pick up a nice handbag for Laura. W.'s own top guy told The Times that they have to convince the Europeans that the president is not ''a shallow, arrogant, gun-loving, abortion-hating, Christian fundamentalist Texan buffoon.'' And his daddy's still sending him memos on how to handle North Korea. Caramba!Saturday is going to be the scariest day, when he meets with the president of Russia about the ABM treaty in Slovenia, which he probably still thinks is Slovakia. I bet he's not even bringing any charts or diagrams with him. He'll be blubbering ''Get me Condi!'' in no time. You think Kennedy looked rattled when he came out of the Khrushchev meeting? Wait until little Georgie gets a load of that K.G.B. stare. He probably thinks Putin is a rude French word a Deke once tried to teach him at Yale. I got criticized for losing Russia and cozying up to corrupt oligarchs. Critics thought I turned a blind eye while Chernomyrdin and his cronies got rich by sucking billions of dollars from the collapsing Soviet Union into their Swiss bank accounts. Just because a vice president hangs around with penniless Communist bureaucrats who turn into Donald Trumps overnight, people doubt your sincerity. I prefer to think of it as launching Russian capitalism in Zurich. Anyhow, I can tell you from experience, W., trust but verify. I know everyone's been wondering why I haven't spoken out against W. and Cheney's environmental pillaging if I feel so passionately about emissions and chlorofluorocarbons and fungicides and stuff. I do care about the Earth. But I care more about getting to be president. So I need to focus on my fund-raising and strategizing. As I told the kids at Sidwell, I have been studying Kahlil Gibran and Deepak Chopra. That's because I'm getting ready to take on W. after I sweep aside those other uppity Ken dolls -- Evan Bayh, John Edwards and John Kerry, and that ungrateful upstart Joe Lieberman already heading to New Hampshire.''The Prophet'' advises silence:  ''For thought is a bird of space, that in a cage of words may indeed unfold its wings but cannot fly.''I have put on a little weight, and I still have The Spot. But that's O.K. As Deepak says, ''Your body is just the place your memories call home.''

To the Editor:Re ''Bush Will Continue to Oppose Kyoto Pact on Global Warming'' (front page, June 12): The Bush administration seems to think that it can remedy ill-advised policy positions  merely by mouthing the right words, even if those words are contradicted by the accompanying actions. By asserting that his administration ''is committed to a leadership role on the issue of climate change,'' while simultaneously abandoning our commitment to actually doing something about it, the president insults the intelligence of his audience both here and abroad during the course of his European trip. Rather than trotting out that old delaying tactic of calling for ''more study,'' Mr. Bush should demonstrate true leadership by making the hard choices needed to address this catastrophic problem, even if they might affect the profits of his corporate contributors just a bit. Leadership means leading, not rejecting. And if the United States won't lead, it's unlikely that any other country will. JOHN SINGER  Northfield, Mass., June 12, 2001

In the debate on global climate change it has long been a given that China, with its huge population and endless coal reserves, would overtake the United States early this century as the biggest source of the atmospheric pollution that scientists believe is warming the planet. That specter of runaway Chinese emissions has been cited by President Bush as a major reason for describing as ''fatally flawed'' the 1997 Kyoto agreement to protect the climate. The treaty exempts developing countries, including China,  from its initial, binding limits on the output of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases that scientists believe are causing traumatic changes in the climate. But treaty obligation or not, China has already achieved a dramatic slowing in its emissions of carbon dioxide in the last decade, Chinese and Western energy experts say. That record of progress has pushed further into the horizon the day that China will surpass the United States as the lead culprit, and it is something that Mr. Bush seems to have overlooked in his harsh appraisal. Chinese officials insist that their country will do its fair share to combat a serious global threat.''We already have one of the world's best records in improving energy efficiency,'' Zhou Dadi, director of the Energy Research Institute of the central government's State Development Planning Commission, said in an interview.''Our challenge is this: Can we give people an acceptable lifestyle and also address the problem of climate change?'' Mr. Zhou said.''As an energy expert, I think we need a demonstration from a developed country to prove that a high living standard can be associated with lower carbon emissions,'' he said. ''Then China will follow that example or even do better.''In the most surprising development, China's annual output of carbon dioxide in the last four years of rapid economic growth has actually declined, according to data compiled by the United States Department of Energy. While the numbers could be overstated because of flaws in both economic and energy statistics, some experts think, China does seem to have achieved a stunning if temporary reversal of the usual trend during economic expansion.''China's emissions of carbon dioxide have shrunk by 17 percent since the mid-1990's,'' according to an April report from researchers at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California. ''Remarkably, over the same period, G.D.P. grew by 36 percent.''''Even without undertaking binding commitments under an international agreement,'' the researchers concluded, China ''has nevertheless contributed substantially to reducing growth in global emissions.''This achievement has been a welcome side effect of China's shift to market prices for fuels, including an end to coal subsidies, and its programs to encourage energy conservation and fight urban air pollution, mainly by curbing the burning of coal. Only a few years ago, many studies projected that China would emerge as the world's leading source of carbon dioxide by 2020, but these recent developments appear to have put off that day by years or even decades. Although the United States has improved its energy efficiency since the oil crises of the 1970's, recent trends like the fad for large, gas-guzzling vehicles have undermined the former goal of returning carbon dioxide output to 1990 levels.''There is a good basis to argue that China has done more to combat climate change over the past decade than has the United States,'' according to a new report by the Natural Resources Defense Council, an American environmental group that aids energy conservation projects in China. Mr. Bush, most recently on Monday, has said he cannot support the 1997 Kyoto Protocol in large part because it exempts China and other developing countries from the initial limits on emissions of greenhouse gases that richer countries are supposed to accept. With his condemnation of the hard-won treaty, Mr. Bush has set off a tempest in Europe and many developing countries, which are more convinced of the looming threat of climate change and had thought they had agreement to act. The signatory countries will meet next month in Bonn to search for ways to save an agreement with some teeth. In his speech on Monday, Mr. Bush complained that China, as the second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases, after the United States, ''was entirely exempted from the requirements in the Kyoto Protocol.''Chinese officials point to what they feel is their unacknowledged progress, but they also say the rich countries, which account for most of the carbon dioxide that has already accumulated in the atmosphere, must show that they are serious.''We've done what we can to reduce emissions, and we'll continue to do so,'' Gao Feng, a senior Foreign Ministry official here who has taken part in the climate negotiations, said in a recent interview. ''But it's not fair to ask the developing countries to take the lead.''''Before the developed countries show that they will do something real and good to address this issue, why should the developing countries make a commitment?'' Mr. Gao asked, repeating the arguments that have led to an impasse between developing nations and the Bush administration. Because it is so large and makes such enormous, inefficient use of coal -- the worst fuel in terms of climate effects -- China is second only to the United States in emissions of carbon dioxide. At the same time, its people consume on average only one-tenth as much energy as Americans, and they hunger for economic advances. In the last decade, according to data compiled by the United States Energy Department, China's carbon dioxide emissions from the burning of fossil fuels have climbed at annual rate of 0.9 percent -- lower than the 1.3 percent a year registered in the United States, even as China's economy expanded much more rapidly. Despite the recent slowdown, experts say, substantial future growth in carbon dioxide emissions is inevitable in China as the country develops. Yet officials here also say that China accepts the need to work against global warming and that at some point, they know, China will need to accept international targets.''Strategically, we have adopted climate change as an important concern in our energy planning,'' said Mr. Zhou of the Energy Research Institute. Before 1980, Mr. Zhou said, China's energy use increased 1.6 times as fast as the economy. But in the last 20 years, he said, energy use has grown at less than half the rate of the economy -- an exceptional advance in the efficient use of fuels. India and other large developing countries have also improved efficiency but not as dramatically. With a combination of increasingly stringent regulations, like energy codes for new buildings, as well as other conservation programs and rising prices, Chinese planners hope to preserve a similar low ratio of energy use to growth in the decade to come, Mr. Zhou said.''It's not easy because there is no precedent anywhere in the world,'' he said. Fuel use in much of China remains extremely wasteful, however, leaving opportunities for large gains.''Our per capita energy use is just one-tenth of that in the United States and one-seventh of that in Europe,'' Mr. Zhou said. ''With development, it must be increased.''I don't think China can achieve a unique style of development,'' he said. ''Americans drive cars while we ride bicycles; you live in houses while we live in dormitories.''Frank Loy, who as under secretary of state under President Clinton helped negotiate climate issues and has since left government, said he  believed that creative new approaches might allow the United States and other countries to proceed against greenhouse gases, but that this would require some give on all sides. Mr. Loy said it was reasonable for the United States to insist on assurances that its efforts will be part of an effective, shared global plan to curb emissions. At the same time, he said, it would not be fair to stifle the development of poor countries. As one possible compromise, Mr. Loy said, developing countries like China could take on an obligation to keep emissions at a certain fraction of economic growth, rather than setting absolute limits. Or they could adopt targets for energy efficiency as their economies grow. Mr. Loy said he believed that some in the Bush Administration started out with a clear goal: ''to drive a stake through the heart of the Kyoto agreement.'' But the outcry at home and abroad, he said, has led them to second thoughts. At the same time, Mr. Loy noted that poor countries, with their extreme vulnerability to climate-related natural disasters, have the most to lose if the agreement collapses, and he called for more flexibility on their part. The original 1992 treaty laying out the framework for climate talks, he noted, called for ''common but differentiated obligations'' on the part of rich and poor countries.''It's too bad that this has been transformed into a group of countries that have real obligations and a group of countries that don't have any,'' he said.

President Bush and European leaders expressed sharp differences and conflicting intentions today about global warming at a summit meeting of the European Union and the United States. It was Mr. Bush's first appearance at a European Union meeting, and his first introduction to several of the leaders, but it was also the second day in a row that he found himself at odds with European officials. On Wednesday, he clashed with leaders of the Atlantic Alliance on his plans for a missile defense shield. And that contentious issue is certain to come up again when he concludes his five-day, five-nation trip on Saturday with a meeting with Russian President Vladimir V. Putin. In today's meetings, the leaders of the European Union seemed intent on starting their relationship on a respectful note, using a studiously cordial tone and carefully measured words. Even so, Mr. Bush and the Europeans laid bare their split over the wisdom of a 1997 treaty, known as the Kyoto Protocol, to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. At least publicly, European leaders say they will press ahead with the accord, while Mr. Bush remains firmly opposed to it. As leaders on each side defended their positions today, the statements underscored tensions in the relationship between the United States and Europe and European leaders' fears that Mr. Bush was marching resolutely to his own drummer as he dealt with foreign policy issues of common concern.''We don't agree on the Kyoto treaty,'' Mr. Bush bluntly stated at a news conference here after talks with Prime Minister Goran Persson of Sweden and the president of the European Commission , Romano Prodi. ''But we do agree that climate change is a serious issue and we must work together.''Later Mr. Bush added, ''I say loud and clear that our nation is willing to lead on this issue.'' Nonetheless, he said, ''We didn't feel like the Kyoto treaty was well balanced. It didn't include developing nations. Its goals were not realistic.''Mr. Persson and Mr. Prodi, speaking at the same news conference, offered dissenting assessments.''The European Union will stick to the Kyoto Protocol and go for a ratification process,'' Mr. Persson said. ''The U.S. has chosen another policy.''In what came across as a gentle rebuke of Mr. Bush, Mr. Persson added that ''climate change is not isolated'' to Europe and is a global threat. ''So, nevertheless, if you are in favor or against the Kyoto Protocol, you have to take action,'' he said. The Kyoto accord would require industrialized nations to cut emissions of greenhouse gases below 1990 levels, a year that the Bush administration has said was chosen to make achieving compliance easier for certain European countries than for the United States. Neither the United States nor any country in the European Union subsequently ratified the treaty, and administration officials said that was in part because some European governments, despite statements of support designed to please voters with environmental concerns, had their own reservations. When Mr. Bush and Mr. Prodi were asked why European countries had not moved faster, Mr. Bush said, ''I think that's a good question.'' And there was a hint of disbelief on the president's face when Mr. Prodi subsequently said that every country would indeed ratify and that the ''process will start soon.''The divergence over Kyoto is just one symbol of various issues on which European leaders believe that the Bush administration is not sensitive to their concerns. And it was not the only way in which the third day of Mr. Bush's first overseas trip was a tough one. Mr. Bush seemed muted during the news conference and gave several erroneous, unclear or unwelcome characterizations of the issues he was addressing. He said at one point during the news conference that ''Europe ought to include nations beyond the current scope of E.U. and NATO'' and that ''my vision of Europe is a larger vision'' that included ''more countries.''He appeared to be advocating expansion of the European Union, which was to be discussed by the 15 member nations on Friday and Saturday. And his remarks prompted a stern response from Chris Patten, the union's external affairs commissioner, who said pointedly, ''The United States is not a member of the European Union.''Mr. Bush, turning his attention to another continent, told reporters, ''We spent a lot of time talking about Africa, and we should. Africa is a nation that suffers from incredible disease.''Mr. Bush had unwaveringly stated his opposition to the Kyoto agreement before he left Washington earlier this week for his first overseas trip as president, which will continue in Poland on Friday and conclude in Slovenia on Saturday when he meets Mr. Putin. During that meeting, Mr. Bush is certain to debate another issue that has already been a contentious one during his European trip -- his desire to abandon the ABM Treaty between Moscow and Washington. The Bush administration's position is that it wants to work to cut emissions by leading the world in the research and development of technologies that will combat global warming without hurting American industries and the country's economy. While the European dissatisfaction with that was stated in relatively polite terms today by Mr. Persson and Mr. Prodi, it is seriously felt, and administration officials acknowledged that it was a more divisive disagreement than the one over the missile treaty. And the nature and depth of the suspicion among some Europeans feel toward Mr. Bush -- a sentiment that other new American presidents have also faced -- was suggested by a statement by Mr. Persson to antiglobalization protesters on Wednesday, before Mr. Bush arrived here. Referring to the European Union, Mr. Persson said, ''It's one of the few institutions we can develop as a balance to U.S. world domination.''

INTERNATIONALA3-15China Is Said to Reduce Carbon Dioxide Emissions  China has greatly slowed emissions of carbon dioxide in the last decade, Chinese and Western energy experts say, pushing back the day that China will presumably pass the United States as the biggest source of the air pollution that scientists believe is warming the planet. The specter of runaway Chinese emissions has been cited by President Bush as a major reason for why the Kyoto climate accord is ''fatally flawed.''A1At a European Union meeting, President Bush and European leaders expressed differences and conflicting intentions on global warming. A6Caution Urged on Missile Plan  Gen. Ronald T. Kadish, the head of the Pentagon's missile defense program, warned Congress that accelerating development of a missile shield would be a mistake without meticulous planning and more money. A11Macedonia Seeks NATO Aid  Macedonia formally asked NATO to send troops to help it disarm ethnic Albanian rebels if terms are reached to end the insurgency. A7Lawyer Fees in Holocaust Case  Fifty-one lawyers representing Nazi-era slave laborers split more than $52 million in legal fees; the laborers will get $5,000 to $7,500 each. A10  Killings Mar Mideast Truce  An Israeli intelligence officer and a Palestinian man were killed in a shootout on a West Bank road. Both sides still seemed prepared to pursue efforts to end months of violence. A10Report on Nepal Massacre  An official panel of inquiry into the killings of most of the royal family on June 1 put the blame solely on Crown Prince Dipendra, who also died. A3  Rights Advocate Attacked  Barb Bocek, a researcher for Amnesty International, was attacked at a Guatemala hotel during a failed kidnapping attempt, colleagues said. A5Deadly Protests in Algiers  The police fired tear gas as hundreds of thousands of protesters marched on the presidential palace demanding greater democracy. Two people died and more than 400 were hurt. A8World BriefingA8NATIONALA16-36Both Sides Assail Plan To Phase Out Vieques Use  President Bush's compromise plan to halt the Navy's bombing exercises in Puerto Rico came under intense attack from critics who said it did not go far enough and from Congressional allies of the Pentagon who said it undermined military readiness. A1A New Military Strategy  Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld plans to scrap the Clinton administration's guiding strategy for the military and replace it with four principles that include a de-emphasis on humanitarian missions, a senior defense official said. A34Partisan Fight Over Nominees  Senior Senate Republicans said talks with the new Democratic majority leader on organizing the Senate had stalled over disputes on the handling of judicial nominees. They called for the issues in contention to be put to a full Senate vote. A31New Interest in Patient Rights  House Republican leaders rushed to write a bill defining patients' rights and said they hoped to push it through the House before the Senate completed work on a rival bill favored by Democrats, who want to impose much more stringent standards for health insurance plans. A26Accused Spy Could Get Life  Prosecutors and lawyers for accused spy Robert P. Hanssen are said to be close to a deal that would spare Mr. Hanssen from the death penalty in exchange for a sentence of life in prison and his full cooperation. A1F.B.I. Agent Avoids Charges  An Idaho prosecutor said that although a federal appeals court had allowed it, he would not press manslaughter charges brought by his predecessor against an F.B.I. sharpshooter who killed a woman during the Ruby Ridge standoff in 1992. A16Arrest in Chicago-Area Killings  The police said a 31-year-old rapist free on parole, Paul Frederick Runge, had murdered and sexually assaulted six women and a girl, including two Bosnian immigrants lured to their deaths by the promise of jobs. With others, he pretended to be interested in property they were selling or renting, officials said. A25NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8$46 Million Lottery Winner Beats the Clock by Mail  Three days after officials declared that no one had claimed a $46 million multistate lottery prize, the winning ticket arrived by mail in Trenton, postmarked two days before the one-year deadline. Officials will disclose the winner's identity today. A1New Jersey Debate  Bob Franks and Bret D. Schundler, Republican gubernatorial candidates, held their second televised debate. B1Sharpton Settles Up  The $65,000 damage award against the Rev. Al Sharpton for defaming a former Dutchess County prosecutor, Steven A. Pagones, in the Tawana Brawley case has been paid in full by supporters of Mr. Sharpton. B6A federal appeals court in Boston upheld the convictions of Mr. Sharpton and three other New York City politicians serving sentences for trespassing during protests on Vieques. B6WEEKENDE1-30; B31-40EDUCATIONSenate Approves Overhaul  The Senate passed, 91 to 8, a bill that requires annual testing and penalizes schools that do not improve. A1SPORTSD1-8OBITUARIESA37SCIENCE/HEALTHResearch Volunteer Dies  A healthy volunteer recently died after inhaling a drug in a federally financed asthma study by Johns Hopkins University, officials said. A16Vitamin C Pills May Do Harm  The pills that millions of health-conscious Americans take may actually help produce poisons that can damage DNA, a step toward forming cancer cells, a study suggested. A26BUSINESS DAYC1-16$45 Billion G.E. Deal Ailing  General Electric's acquisition of Honeywell International appeared near collapse after G.E. said its final concessions would probably not satisfy European regulators. C1Airline and Pilots Have Deal  Striking pilots and Comair, a commuter carrier of Delta Air Lines, reached a tentative agreement on the 81st day of a strike. C1Market Research Inquiry  A House subcommittee began hearings on brokerage firm research analysts, with some witnesses saying analysts had simply been caught off guard by the sudden downturn in stocks but with others saying Wall Street research was biased. C4Ford Faults Replacement Tires  Ford said some of the Firestone tires it began replacing last month failed even more often than those recalled last fall and that a crucial component of many of the tires was too thin. C4Crackdown on Net Fraud  The Federal Trade Commission and the Food and Drug Administration are stepping up enforcement actions against companies marketing fraudulent health products online. C4Business DigestC1World BusinessW1EDITORIALA38-39Editorials: Misrepresenting the ABM treaty; Wall Street's conflicted research; aid for dissidents in Cuba. Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman. CrosswordE28  TV ListingsE29  Public LivesB2  WeatherC16

What President Bush has been telling European leaders this week can be readily summed up: I am not going to do anything about global warming because it needs more scientific study. But I am going to act urgently to develop a missile defense system although none have any proven scientific basis and every test so far has failed. In that odd couple of messages the allies got a fair introduction to the veritable George W. Bush: a man of strong opinions stubbornly held, in defiance of reason as most Europeans would define it. They also saw a man of charm, easy in human relations and adept politically, but with a certitude not earned by experience or accomplishment.''I hope the notion of a unilateral approach died in some people's minds here today,'' Mr. Bush said after talking with NATO leaders about his missile defense project. ''Unilateralists don't come around the table to listen to others and to share opinion.''Yes, Mr. Bush listened -- but only with the ear, not with a mind open to other ideas. No one sitting around that NATO table could have had any illusion of being able to persuade him that it is folly to abandon the most important barrier against a renewed nuclear arms race, the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, so he can pursue the will-o'-the-wisp of missile defense. There is a rigidity in George W. Bush, verging on arrogance, that Americans have seen on a number of issues in his first five months as president. A striking example is his attitude on the environment. He began by having his environment administrator, Christie Whitman -- to her evident embarrassment -- withdraw a Clinton administration rule limiting the amount of arsenic in drinking water. Then his secretary of agriculture, Ann M. Veneman, suspended a regulation banning roads in many roadless areas of our national forests. Those and other moves brought an outcry from Americans who want to protect our natural surroundings -- and protect themselves from dangerous substances. Many of those who worried were in the suburban districts that voted for Mr. Bush. The president reacted to the political problem by putting on a show of concern for the environment. He traveled to the Everglades. He posed amid Sequoia trees in California. But his real position on the environment has not changed at all. In the Sequoia appearance he said the federal government must show more deference to states and private groups in conservation efforts -- which is code for scuttling federal enforcement. In recent weeks there have been other anti-environment moves. The Army Corps of Engineers proposed relaxing rules against the destruction of wetlands. The Forest Service issued draft regulations that would eliminate the priority for ecological sustainability in forest use plans. The administration announced that it would, after all, support the Clinton plan for roadless forest areas. But it quietly made a crucial concession in court to timber and other interests that had sued against the plan: It conceded that they would suffer irreparable injury from it. In short, the emollient Bush words about loving the environment did not match the reality of the administration's destructive actions. Mr. Bush's position is still based on a simple proposition: What is good for drillers and developers is good for the country. That same fixed preference for business now over the health of future generations underlay his denunciation of the Kyoto Protocol on global warming. A single proposition also underlies Mr. Bush's determination to destroy the ABM treaty. He does not believe in treaties limiting weapons of mass destruction, even though they have manifestly worked well, because they limit our freedom of action -- as if somehow mutual security diminished American manhood. .That is the president the European leaders met. Most, though disagreeing, treated him deferentially. For the last 50 years, European politicians have always cozied up to American presidents. They simply feel too dependent for their security on the dominant member of the alliance. But European military experts, environmentalists and many ordinary citizens are not so polite. They are frightened of George W. Bush. Abroad at Home

Japan's foreign minister, Makiko Tanaka, said today that Tokyo would work ''to the last moment'' to persuade the United States to support the Kyoto Protocol to curb global warming. Ms. Tanaka's comments, made on the eve of her first official trip to the United States, were the latest in a drum roll of remarks by senior officials here this week aimed at supporting European efforts to convince Washington to reconsider its opposition to the accords to limit greenhouse gas emissions. On Wednesday, Japan's popular new prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi called the Bush Administration position on the accords ''truly deplorable,'' and also pledged to continue working to persuade Washington to change its position. Ms. Tanaka is expected to take up the subject in her first meeting with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell on Monday in Washington, and Mr. Koizumi, who is scheduled to meet with Mr. Bush in their first summit on June 30, has already signaled his intention to follow up on the issue. But even as Japan stakes out a position strongly in favor of the 1997 accord, which was named after this country's ancient capital and has inevitably become linked to national pride, Ms. Tanaka has carefully kept Japan's options open with regard to the agreement, saying that ratification ''cannot go ahead with European countries while leaving the United States behind.''Japan's calculated ambiguity on the issue, strongly urging the United States to ratify the protocol, while hedging its own commitment in the case Washington refuses, reveals the complex political geometry behind the accord. The 1997 protocol requires industrial countries to impose binding limits on emissions of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases by an average of 5.2 percent below 1990 levels from 2008 to 2012. For the protocol to take effect, a collection of countries that emit 55 percent of the world's industrial greenhouse gases would have to ratify it. And with Washington appearing set against the accord, and Europe set firmly in support of it, Japan, with the world's second largest economy, has emerged as the critical pivot. If Tokyo adopted the protocol, the presence of Japan and Europe together would ensure ratification. Similarly, if Japan opted out because of the refusal of the United States to ratify it, the protocol would become a dead letter.''Japan is key,'' said Svend Auken, Denmark's energy and environment minister, in a statement to the World Bank on Friday, according to Bloomberg News. ''Russia, the Ukraine and the European Union account for about 53 percent. It is the last 2 percent that is difficult.'' While Japan has made common cause with Europe in pressuring Washington to reconsider its opposition to the accord, Tokyo has carefully avoided tilting its hand about what it would do in the end. In April, for example, Japan's Parliament strongly approved a resolution calling for ratification of the agreement. Mr. Koizumi faced repeated questions from the Parliament this week urging him to submit the pact to the legislature for its approval. Some members of his cabinet, too, are known to be strongly in favor of ratification. Mr. Koizumi, however, has avoided committing himself. ''At the moment, we have not decided to make an independent decision,'' he told the legislature on Thursday.

INTERNATIONALA3-9In Warsaw, Bush Urges Eastward NATO Expansion  President Bush called for an Atlantic Alliance stretching all the way to Russia's borders, one day before his first meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. Mr. Bush urged a broad, steady expansion of NATO into countries of Eastern Europe that are not in the alliance. A1A day after Mr. Bush visited Goteborg, Sweden, hundreds of demonstrators continued protesting an array of issues during a meeting of European Union leaders. They clashed with police, forcing the leaders to cancel a dinner in the city center. Police reported dozens of injuries. A9U.S. to Stay Out of Macedonia  The Bush administration has told its NATO partners that it does not want to participate in a NATO military mission that the Macedonian government has requested for the disarming of ethnic Albanian insurgents, officials said. A3Day Two of Mideast Truce  The second full day of an Israeli-Palestinian cease-fire ended without reports of serious violence, but the two sides accused each other of not doing enough to cement the shaky truce. A6World BriefingA4SCIENCE/HEALTHCurbs on Global Warming  Japan's foreign minister, Makiko Tanaka, said Tokyo would work ''to the last moment'' to persuade the United States to support the Kyoto Protocol on global warming. A9President Bush's opposition to industrialized countries having to cut heat-trapping gas emissions if developing countries are exempt from similar obligations has intensified a longstanding deadlock over who does what and when. A9America's Catholic bishops voted to issue a statement calling for immediate action to mitigate the effects of global climate change. A11NATIONALA10-13Wife of Spy Suspect Says He Had Confessed to Priest  The wife of Robert P. Hanssen, the former F.B.I. agent charged with espionage, has told the authorities that he confided to her and to a priest in 1980 that he was supplying information to the K.G.B. She said the priest persuaded her husband to donate the $20,000 he had received from the Soviets to charity, according to people involved in the case. A1Coal's Comeback  America's energy disruptions combined with an administration that has elevated energy security over environmental protection have given coal a new lease on life. A1California Energy Debate  Aides to Gov. Gray Davis released details of the $43 billion in contracts that California has signed with 18 companies to supply much of its power over the next decade, prompting a debate over whether the contracts have stabilized the state's electricity market or whether Mr. Davis has locked residents into overpaying for power for years to come. A10Vieques Referendum Opposed  The secretary of the Navy said he would ask Congress to cancel a referendum among the residents of the Puerto Rican island to determine whether they want American forces to continue to train there. A10Officials Accused of Corruption  The top official of a Chicago suburb where Al Capone once reigned was arrested by federal agents along with a former police chief and a former town treasurer, all accused of making Cicero a ''personal piggy bank'' by siphoning $10 million from the town's insurance program. A10Fox Intervenes in Execution  President Vicente Fox of Mexico is pleading for the life of a Mexican man scheduled to be executed on Tuesday in Oklahoma, citing a violation of international law that has been at the center of several unsuccessful death penalty appeals. But this time it appears that officials may be receptive to the appeal. A11Religion JournalA13NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8For Lottery Winner, What A Difference a Year Makes  Two days before the deadline for cashing in a $46 million winning lottery ticket, Melvin B. Milligan, a 40-year-old computer technician, calmly dropped the ticket in a curbside mailbox, bound for lottery headquarters in Trenton. Mr. Milligan told only his mother-in-law and wife, in that order, of his sudden fortune. B1SPORTSD1-8Lakers Win Series  Los Angeles beat the Philadelphia 76ers, 108-96, winning the N.B.A. Championship, 4 games to 1. D1OBITUARIESB9Sir David Spedding  A British spy who rose to head the Secret Intelligence Service, or M.I.6 -- a position immortalized by the author Ian Fleming as the espionage chief known as ''M'' -- he was 58. B9ARTS & IDEASB11-20Stranger Than Fiction  Publishers of fiction and literature in the Middle East face not only the loss of serious readers to television, but also regional factors like war, censorship, poverty, religious fervor and illiteracy, all combining to threaten the future of fiction. B11Discriminating Behavior  Kenji Yoshino, a 32-year-old gay Asian-American law professor at Yale, is shaking up the legal establishment's approach to discrimination cases. Instead of sidestepping behavior, Mr. Yoshino says,lawyers should call attention to it, starting with assimilation. B11BUSINESS DAYC1-14Huge Loss for Nortel  Nortel Networks of Canada expects to announce one of the biggest losses in corporate history, $19.2 billion this quarter. Nortel, the world's biggest maker of communications equipment, pointed to a steep decline in spending by many customers. A1Stocks fell after the Nortel announcement. The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 66.49 points, or 0.6 percent, to 10,623.64. The Nasdaq composite index fell 15.64 points, and the broader Standard & Poor's 500-stock index dipped 5.51 points. C3Judge Orders Merger  A judge ruled that Tyson Foods Inc., the nation's largest poultry producer, had no legal grounds for withdrawing its $4.7 billion offer to buy IBP Inc. and ordered Tyson to complete the deal. C1Honeywell Extension  The European Commission, amid signs of pressure from the United States, said there remained a ''limited opportunity'' for General Electric to offer more to win approval of its planned $45 billion acquisition of Honeywell International. C1Business DigestC1EDITORIALA14-15Editorials: Helping New York grow; fix the flaws in school reform; a win for contraception; too slow an exit from Vieques. Columns: Anthony Lewis. BridgeB18  TV ListingsB20  CrosswordB18  WeatherB6  Public LivesA10

In recent days, President Bush has repeatedly said a major reason for his rejection of a proposed agreement to stem global warming is that it would require industrialized countries to cut heat-trapping gas emissions while exempting developing countries from similar obligations. His view -- shared by the Senate in a 95-to-0 vote on a 1997 resolution --  is that rapidly growing countries like China and India are poised to pass industrialized countries in output of these gases, and so everyone must move to solve the problem. Many experts in international environmental law and policy agree that, in the long run, this is true. But they note that insistence on binding commitments by all countries at the same time runs counter to a principle that has shaped almost every other recent environmental treaty: cleanups should be started by prosperous countries because they created the bulk of the problem and have the money and technology to fix it. A prime example, the experts say, is the 1987 Montreal Protocol to curb substances that deplete the ozone layer, negotiated during the Reagan administration. That agreement, which has largely stemmed releases of damaging chlorofluorocarbons, applied first to industrial powers, with China and India being granted a grace period of 10 years. But the most relevant agreement is the first climate treaty, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was signed in 1992 by Mr. Bush's father and approved unanimously by the Senate. The Kyoto Protocol was negotiated in 1997 after it became clear that the 1992 treaty, which called for voluntary efforts to cut emissions, was not working. The 1992 agreement includes several statements specifying that the first steps toward limiting warming should be taken by the industrial powers that stoked the atmosphere with the vast majority of its existing concentrations of long-lived greenhouse gases, mainly carbon dioxide. Dr. Lawrence Susskind, a professor of urban and environmental planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the author of ''Environmental Diplomacy'' (Oxford University Press, 1995), said: ''The convention came into force and is now part of international law. We signed it, we ratified it.''''There's nothing in the Kyoto Protocol that is inconsistent with that convention,'' Dr. Susskind added. Mr. Bush's position has intensified a longstanding deadlock over who does what and when. Government officials involved in climate talks through the years said Mr. Bush's position on participation by developing countries was not markedly different from that of previous administrations -- just more bluntly stated. The main American complaint, they said, is that developing countries, negotiating as a bloc, have for more than a decade rejected almost any treaty language that would commit them to even undefined emissions limits far in the future. A consistent frustration for American negotiators, one official said, is that countries like Saudi Arabia and China refuse commitments just as  steadfastly as the poorest of the poor.''We're not saying Burkina Faso has to sign up to this right now,'' said the American official, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity. ''But the major emitters, if we want this to be credible scientifically and environmentally, have to sign on.''Some countries are starting to complain that Mr. Bush's insistence on simultaneous actions is undermining the existing climate treaty. At a briefing on Thursday in Beijing, Sun Yuxi, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, strongly criticized the American stance.''China can't accept any attempt to violate the principles of the convention and eliminate the protocol,'' Mr. Sun said. ''It is totally groundless to refuse the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol on the excuse that developing countries such as China have not shouldered their responsibility.''There are a few optimists among those involved in the climate talks who see a middle ground that could put the Bush administration and the most developed of the developing countries under the same tent. They point to a treaty controlling harmful organic chemicals that was signed in April by the Bush administration. The treaty calls for rich and poor countries to move in concert, but it requires industrialized countries to provide the money and technology to help the cleanup in the developing world. But the pessimists point to basic differences between the Kyoto pact and the chemical ban and other successful environmental treaties. Experts say most of the previous treaties applied to chemicals that were produced by a limited number of companies and could be replaced by other, less harmful substances without high costs. Or, as in the case of the climate convention, they relied on voluntarism and good will. In contrast, the Kyoto agreement, by proposing firm, enforceable limits on carbon dioxide, emitted mainly by burning fossil fuels, would affect nearly every enterprise powered by coal or oil -- meaning almost every aspect of modern life. As a result, Mr. Bush's insistence that the United States will not act until China and India commit to some steps essentially guarantees that the agreement is dead, experts say. Robert A. Reinstein -- who wrote and negotiated many parts of the 1992 climate treaty during the first Bush administration -- said there was no chance of getting poorer countries to pursue emissions cuts as long as the established economic powers delayed cutting their own.''If I were a developing country,'' Mr. Reinstein said, ''I'd just sit there and say 'Show us what you're actually doing with your own emissions and what you're delivering on in your existing commitments and we'll feel a little more comfortable sitting down at the table.' ''

To the Editor:It seems that much of the criticism that President Bush is facing in Europe centers on his rejection of the Kyoto Protocol on global warming (front page, June 12). If that is the case, it is either ignorance on the part of the typical European or sheer hypocrisy on the part of the governments in the countries that Mr. Bush is visiting; not one has ratified the treaty. AVRAHAM BRONSTEIN  New York, June 12, 2001

While stopping short of endorsing any particular prescription, America's Roman Catholic bishops voted unanimously today to issue a statement calling for immediate action to mitigate the effects of global climate change. Meeting in an Atlanta suburb, the bishops steered clear of the roiling debate between the Bush administration and many environmentalists over the 1997 global warming agreement known as the Kyoto Protocol. Mr. Bush opposes that agreement, which was negotiated by the Clinton administration to set mandates for the United States and other countries to reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide. Mr. Bush's reversal of the United States' stance has angered many allies in Europe, where he traveled this week. Rather than entering that politically sensitive debate, the bishops set down principles for guiding the country's approach to what they acknowledge is a complicated issue. But the statement by the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, titled ''Global Climate Change: A Plea for Dialogue, Prudence and the Common Good,'' also asserts that the United States, because of its wealth, its position in the world and its record as a heavy producer of heat-trapping, or greenhouse, gases, must play a special role in protecting the planet.''Historically, the industrialized countries have emitted more greenhouse gases that warm the climate than have the developing countries,'' the document states. ''Affluent nations such as our own have to acknowledge the impact of voracious consumerism instead of simply calling for population and emissions controls from people in poorer nations.''Although the document is unique in terms of its subject, it follows more than a decade of increasingly outspoken interest by the bishops on the environment. By 1993, the United States Catholic Conference had begun an environmental justice program that encouraged local action by Catholics to protect the environment, with a special eye toward helping the poor. The church has also encouraged priests to take up local concerns, like sprawl and industrial pollution of watersheds. Bishops in the Northwest, for example, adopted a pastoral letter in February urging the protection of the Columbia River and its tributaries as God's creations. Last fall, Cardinal Bernard F. Law of Boston and all 20 bishops in northern New England, citing the need for ''moral evaluation'' of environmental issues, called for protecting fish stocks and condemned ''personal habits of overconsumption and waste.'' They called on parishes to include references to the environment in their religious programs. Connecticut bishops spoke out in April, calling for reduced automobile emissions and more attention to the problem of pediatric asthma. Throughout the document put forth today, the bishops take a particular interest in the potential harm of global warming on the world's poor. It says that poorer nations have a ''right to economic development'' and that their wealthier counterparts ought to help them develop technologies that would produce lower emissions of heat-trapping gases. The statement, which took three years to produce, was adopted on a voice vote by the 217 bishops present. The document makes no independent judgment about global warming, but accepts that numerous scientific findings point to significant evidence that human behavior and activity have contributed to it. The bishops also discuss the need to protect the environment as a means of exercising stewardship of God's creation. And the statement calls on the United States to ''undertake reasonable and effective initiatives for energy conservation and the development of alternate renewable and clean-energy resources.''Cardinal Roger Mahony, the archbishop of Los Angeles and chairman of the conference's committee on domestic policy, said the bishops did not believe they had the expertise to take a stand on the Kyoto accord or any other detailed plan to combat global warming. He described the Kyoto agreement, and a previous accord reached in Rio de Janeiro, as helpful, but said continuing research and discussion were needed.

AS the nation once again reaches for an iced tea to rub against its forehead, the chat turns inevitably, if listlessly, to global warming, the artificial raising of the planet's thermostat. Ratify the Kyoto Protocol? Harms the American economy, says President Bush. Cut back on greenhouse emissions? Drives up electricity prices, say economists. Require smaller cars? Minivans carry my children to school, say the parents. Swelter, swelter, swelter. Enter three scientists pushing a big, if long-term, idea: cool down the Earth by slowly moving it -- the entire planet, that is -- farther away from the Sun. In a recent issue of the professional journal Astrophysics and Space Science, Don Korycansky, Greg Laughlin and Fred Adams playfully propose finding an asteroid about 60 miles long -- about half the length of Long Island -- to be used in a ''gravitational sling shot.''A rocket could be strapped to the asteroid, they say, and the asteroid maneuvered into an immense orbit more than seven times wider than the radius of the solar system. The asteroid would then pass close enough to Earth to tug it gently away from the Sun. (One hitch, the authors acknowledge, would be a collision, which would ''sterilize the biosphere most effectively, at least to the level of bacteria.'') While the solution may seem outsized, the three scientists are actually eyeing a larger-scale version of global warming. As the Sun burns through its hydrogen, it gets bigger and brighter, leading to hotter temperatures on Earth. In a billion years, the Sun will be 10 percent brighter, killing off many forms of life on Earth. Moving the planet away from the Sun, in this view, is simply shoving it away from a red-hot stove. It would be fitting if the idea occurred to Mr. Korycansky, the paper's principal author and a planetary scientist at the University of California at Santa Cruz, on a blistering summer day. But it was on a sunny and mild September day in 1999 that Mr. Korycansky chatted with Mr. Laughlin, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, about the daunting problem of the Sun's lethal luminosity. Earth-moving was Mr. Laughlin's idea, the asteroid was Mr. Korycansky's, while Mr. Adams, a University of Michigan physicist, was brought in later to figure out timing, which, as will be seen, is everything. As they write in their paper, ''the general problem of long-term planetary engineering is almost alarmingly feasible'' using current technologies. After all, ''gravitational slingshots'' using Jupiter and Saturn have already been used to propel the Galileo and Cassini deep-space missions. The principle is a lot like a planetary square dance in which even the tiniest dancer can slightly deflect and accelerate a gargantuan partner, and vice versa, as they swing each other round and round. An asteroid roughly 60 miles long passing within 10,000 miles of Earth would tug the planet into an orbit whose radius gets longer by about 30 miles with each pass, or every 6,000 years. Of course, it would take a long-lived civilization to witness the feat -- the equivalent of the ancient Egyptians firing a deep-space rocket with the expectation that their descendants would greet its return in the 21st century. Nonetheless, Mr. Korycansky and his friends foresee at least one million of these orbits, slowly balancing out the Sun's increasing ferocity and thus preserving life on Earth. BY the millionth pass, however, the Earth would have a 50 percent larger orbit.''Of course, we'd then have to move Mars,'' Mr. Korycansky said. Jupiter would be affected, too, and so would Venus, but probably in ways too small to really matter to Earth. ''The larger question is,'' he said, ''if you move a planet, is it your responsibility to, you know, shepherd the other planets?''And the Earth, while rescued, would not escape consequences, either. Every time the asteroid passed, it would exert a tidal force 10 times that of the moon, leading to likely tsunamis, immense storms and other disruptions. ''We would have to batten down the hatches,'' Mr. Korycansky said. Don't even mention the seasons, say skeptical climate researchers. A bigger orbit means a longer year, affecting the all-important tilt of Earth toward the Sun.''At a zero tilt, straight up and down, there would be no seasons,'' said Dr. Ronald J. Stouffer, who designs computer climate models at the federal Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory. ''At a 90-degree tilt, you have two seasons, one that's all daylight all the time and the other that's all nighttime all the time.''Of course, the biggest complication of all is simply this: Instead of missing by a whisker, an ill-timed asteroid larger than Rhode Island could very well crash into the Earth. It would be the gravest miscalculation since, perhaps, a similar one many millions of years ago that wiped out ancient dinosaur astronomers.

THOUSANDS of protesters chanted against President Bush during his stops in Spain, Belgium and Sweden last week, some baring their rear ends; European leaders spoke condescendingly of America's president; the European press depicted him as a cowboy hayseed. In other words, from the European perspective, the Bush visit could not have gone better. As the European Union struggles to expand, to ''harmonize'' its thousands of overlapping rules, to manage its uncountable internecine jealousies and to formulate a new understanding of what it means to be European, there is one thing all Europeans seem to agree on. It is faux horror about the United States. For all their pretenses of being dismayed by Mr. Bush, if European Union leaders were to describe their dream American president for this moment in time, they might well specify someone exactly like Mr. Bush -- seemingly, at least to European eyes, unsophisticated, swaggering and brash, all the qualities the European Union can unite on in dreading the United States.''The European Union has a hormone problem,'' says Jeffrey Gedmin, a Europe scholar who runs the New Atlantic Initiative at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington. ''They are developing a sense that whatever diminishes the stature of the United States is of benefit to Europe.''During Mr. Bush's visit, President Jacques Chirac of France, Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder of Germany and Prime Minister Wim Kok of the Netherlands all criticized his positions on global warming and missile defense, breaking the taboo that heads of state do not air disagreements during state visits. The Council of Europe, roughly analogous to the Organization of American States, was so underwhelmed that the American president was in its jurisdiction that by midweek the front page of its Web site had no mention of his presence. Instead, the major news was, ''Parliamentary Assembly to Observe Elections in Bulgaria.''Such slights against the leader of the best friend Europe has ever had were intended to inflate the European Union's collective ego. For great issues have recently made the European Union fractious: proposed expansion from 15 to 27 member nations (basically all the former Eastern Europeans states want in, and Ireland just voted no to that); whether Turkey should become part of Europe (if it qualifies for the European Union, Turkey would receive huge subsidies); whether there should be a European meta-government that supersedes national capitals. And with the demise of the Soviet Union, Europe now has no enemy to unite its competing states. In such a context, Europe might find it useful to have a common antagonist. Enter Mr. Bush. The Bush administration's rejection of the Kyoto global warming treaty, supposedly bad news, actually could not have been scripted better. European Union leaders got to repeatedly denounce Mr. Bush for saying the United States will not ratify Kyoto -- though no European Union nation has ratified it, either. After the 1992 ''Earth Summit'' in Rio, when Mr. Bush's father declared that the United States would not accept mandatory greenhouse-gas reductions, he was lambasted by European leaders, who vowed prompt, decisive action to impose restrictions on their own. They did nothing. Last week, after deriding the Bush position on Kyoto, the European Union again vowed prompt greenhouse action, promising to ratify Kyoto on its own. Yet no European nation other than Denmark has any serious greenhouse-reduction strategy even in the planning stages, while a stand-alone European Union ratification of Kyoto is a million-to-one shot. From the Europeans' standpoint, the ideal outcome was for the Kyoto treaty to collapse but for Washington to take the blame. Now Europe gets to act outraged, while being spared the hard work and cost of actual reform. Indeed, despite European protestations, American ecological standards are far more strict than European rules, and have been for 20 years or more. ''Europe is now the world leader on environmental issues,'' the Swedish environment minister, Kjell Larsson, said as Mr. Bush arrived in his nation. But Paris today has worse smog than Houston; water quality, especially of rivers, is lower in Europe than in the United States; acid rain reduction has been more rapid in the United States than in Europe; European Union nations like Greece, Italy and Portugal still discharge huge volumes of untreated municipal waste water, a practice all but banned in America. In addition, the European Union did not act against leaded gasoline till more than a decade after the United States; the forested percentage of the United States is higher than the forested percentage of most European countries, while America has fewer threatened species than Europe; and many other environmental indicators favor the United States. It is true that Europe is more energy-efficient than America. And moreover, as Bjorn Lomborg, a professor at the University of Aarhus in Denmark, demonstrates in the forthcoming book ''The Skeptical Environmentalist,'' smog is declining and water quality improving everywhere in the West, Europe and America alike. But the idea that Europe is ahead on environmental matters is a convenient fiction of European politics. TRYING to build up Europe by acting outraged against America has become the European national sport on many fronts. One is anger about globalization by American companies, though European firms are themselves active globalizers. European diplomats harp on America's refusal to agree to a global treaty banning land mines. (The Pentagon maintains that its defense of the North-South Korean border rules out a land-mine ban.) Land-mine reduction is an important goal, but pales on the arms agenda compared with reduction of nuclear warheads -- something that, inconveniently, Washington is pursuing. On no subject is Europe's internal need to feel superior to the United States more clear than capital punishment. Outlawing capital punishment is now a condition of European Union membership, and European commentators like to suggest there is a huge values gap between Europe and America. Always skipped is that 12 American states ban the death penalty, while polls show public pro-and-con views regarding capital punishment are nearly identical in the United States and the European Union. When the French politician Jack Lang was campaigning for mayor of Paris, he ostentatiously traveled to Texas to meet with a death-row prisoner; he was lauded in France. (Imagine if a candidate for mayor of Dallas traveled to Paris to meet with poor North African immigrants to discuss French racism.) Something besides moral opposition to the death penalty underlies this European obsession. That something may extend to a realignment of American-European relations. Speaking in France before Mr. Bush's visit, former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger said the European allies now perceive a need to check American strength. Using the balance-of-power calculations that are the mainstay of traditional European diplomacy, Europe worries that America is too strong, and wants to bring it down a notch. Mr. Gedmin of the American Enterprise Institute thinks the day may not be far off when Europe sides with Russia or even China against America on some key issue. A possible preview: When Mr. Bush first decided to review North Korea policy, the European Union sent a delegation to Pyongyang to confuse the situation. It seems certain there's more Euro-static coming, because for the moment, many European leaders believe that making small of America is in their interest.

President Bush's overseas trip has done nothing to narrow the gap between his administration and Europe on global warming. For their part, the Europeans accept the overwhelming scientific consensus that man-made gases are heavily responsible for the warming of Earth's atmosphere. They believe that the consequences are likely to be calamitous unless the industrialized world commits itself, as it did in the Kyoto accord of 1997, to binding reductions in greenhouse gases. Yesterday, they also agreed to push ahead with ratification of the accord by the end of the year. Mr. Bush questions the science, insists that mandatory reductions in emissions will undermine the American economy and overstates the obstacles presented by developing nations like China. The two sides agreed to keep talking. But if this pledge is to amount to anything, everyone will need to work harder, including the Europeans. Mr. Bush has taken most of the criticism in the global warming debate, and rightly so. But Europe's behavior has not been spotless. Europe is able to hold the moral high ground in part because of several fortunate (and rarely acknowledged) events that make its task of meeting the treaty's mandates much easier than America's. For example, post-reunification Germany achieved huge reductions in carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, simply by closing inefficient industries in the former East Germany. Similarly, Britain achieved significant cuts when Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher essentially shut down the coal mines and greatly increased the use of cleaner natural gas. Meanwhile, Europe has been reluctant to embrace various mechanisms that might ease the economic burden on the United States. At the last ministerial meeting in the Hague, Europe resisted when the United States asked that countries be allowed to win credit for carbon ''sinks,'' including reforestation projects, which draw carbon dioxide out of the air through photosynthesis. And until quite recently, Europe has not been enthusiastic about emissions trading, a market mechanism favored by Americans that has been shown to greatly reduce the costs of emissions control. Still, there is little doubt that when it comes to taking real steps to reduce carbon emissions at the source -- from cars, power plants and factories -- European governments, especially Britain and Germany, far outshine the United States. They have negotiated agreements with industry, imposed so-called eco-taxes and made serious investments in energy efficiency. In the United States, by contrast, nearly all the progress has been made by private companies. The automobile industry, for example, is pouring significant research money into more fuel-efficient hybrid engines (while continuing to profit from their gas-guzzling S.U.V.'s). And a growing number of big multinational corporations, encouraged by advocacy groups like the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, have agreed to make major investments in reducing carbon emissions. But these are isolated efforts. Overall carbon emissions in the United States continue to rise, and Mr. Bush's policies are likely to make matters worse. Despite his promise to search for ''cutting edge'' solutions, his budget for 2002 actually cuts several important energy efficiency programs, while his new energy strategy relies heavily on finding more of the very fossil fuels that contribute to warming. Equally important, he has shown little appetite for the leadership role the United States must take if this problem is ever going to be solved. Indeed, he seems more concerned with finding reasons why the United States should not lead. One of his favorite gripes about the Kyoto accord is that big developing countries like China are not covered. It is true that the warming problem cannot be solved without China's participation. But China is actually making surprising reductions on its own, partly by modernizing dirty coal-fired power plants. Furthermore, it has always been generally understood that the industrialized nations would move first, the developing nations later. That was exactly the sequence adopted by the Montreal Protocol of 1987, which has been successful in controlling the chemicals that threatened the ozone layer. Then, as now, the feeling was that the richer nations should move first because they have the expertise and because they carry a heavier moral obligation. After all, most of the man-made carbon sitting in the atmosphere was generated by them. But these ethical nuances, and much else about global warming, seem lost on the present White House.

AT a news conference in Madrid last week, a puzzled journalist's question to President Bush expressed, with mathematical concision, the growing suspicion in the scientific community that it carries no more weight with the administration than do the American League baseball standings with the average Basque:''You say the scientific evidence isn't strong enough to go forward with Kyoto. So then how do you justify your missile defense plan when there is even less scientific evidence that that will work?''Mr. Bush avoided answering the question directly. But some scientists argue that the president and his top officials, including Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, are trying to have it both ways. On the one hand, they cite the lack of conclusive research on climate change to argue against the Kyoto accord on global warming. At the same time, they are eager to push ahead with the development of a national missile defense despite even greater scientific uncertainties. This sort of reasoning has led many scientists in the United States to conclude that the current administration is uninterested in scientific research or its conclusions. That scientists are sometimes ignored by politicians is nothing new. But Dr. Hugh Gusterson, a cultural anthropologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who studies American science and the federal laboratories, said he believed there is a particular problem with the Bush presidency, in that most major scientists today, whatever their politics, are unwilling to accept White House policies.''Usually Republicans have their scientists and Democrats have their scientists,'' said Dr. Gusterson.  ''What's extraordinary about this moment in time, on both missile defense and the greenhouse effect, is the substantial consensus against the White House policy.''Indeed, some experts believe that science's influence in public policy matters has not been at such a low ebb since before World War I.Mr. Bush has not yet appointed a national science adviser or filled other top science positions in agencies like the National Institutes of Health and the Environmental Protection Agency. And with the exception of health and defense, which have fared well, the administration's proposed 2002 budget includes sharp cuts in real spending for most research funding agencies.''The major thing that's happening is that a science adviser, or science and technology adviser, to the president has not yet been named,'' said Dr. D. Allan Bromley, the Yale physicist, the science adviser for President Bush's father, who has criticized the current administration for its tepid financial support of science. Dr. Gusterson pointed out that President Ronald Reagan had no trouble plucking a simpatico science adviser, Dr. George A. Keyworth II, out of Los Alamos National Laboratory. Previous administrations, however, have sometimes been slow to fill scientific posts, and Dr. Bromley pointed out that Mr. Bush's prolonged election count left him with less time than others to make his appointments. Dr. Bromley also said that in his view, the Kyoto accord contained flaws unrelated to climate science that fully justified its rejection. But others see a more fundamental difference between this administration and its predecessors. ''My own impression is we've entered a new era,'' said Dr. David C. Cassidy, a science historian at Hofstra University. ''Physicists in particular have lost a lot of clout, and they've even lost a lot of esteem in the public eye, and I think that's reflected in the fact that they're now being more ignored in their advice.''UNHAPPILY out in the cold, scientists are asking, among other things, whether it is just a coincidence that their current marginal status in the policy arena coincides with the fact that there is no grand, moral figure among their ranks, no Albert Einstein or Andrei Sakharov to whom politicians would have to pay attention. And they question whether it isn't the scientific community itself, having arrogantly dismissed scientist-popularizers like the astronomer Carl Sagan or the biologist Stephen Jay Gould, that has discouraged others from aspiring to public visibility and influence. Science historians point out, too, that research in general has become a vastly more cooperative enterprise in recent decades, with teams of hundreds of scientists working on the genome project and particle physics experiments, leaving no hero alone in the spotlight. It was not always so. Perhaps the single most influential bit of scientific advice to a politician came when Einstein wrote to President Franklin D. Roosevelt on Aug. 2, 1939, warning him that Germany might be working on an atomic bomb and urging that the United States undertake a similar project. Offical science committees also played major roles in President Dwight D. Eisenhower's development of intercontinental ballistic missiles and President Richard M. Nixon's decision to cease work on germ weapons. But Dr. Paul Forman, curator of the modern physics collection at the National Museum of American History in Washington, says that scientists, like politicians, live in a culture that has grown suspicious of public figures, especially those who come with high reputations or are allied to prestigious institutions. Even if they were here today, Mr. Forman said, Einstein, Sakharov or Richard Feynman (who in 1986 interrupted the staid choreography of a Congressional hearing by showing, with a glass of ice water, how an O-ring could have failed and caused the Challenger space shuttle disaster) would not have the authority they once had. The demotion of science in political circles is not unprecedented -- witness the elimination of the Office of Technology Assessment, which advised Congress on scientific and technical issues, during the Gingrich revolution of the mid-1990's. And that was just one highly visible point on a long downward arc from an intoxicating height achieved during the world wars and the cold war, said Dr. Spencer Weart, director of the Center for the History of Physics at the American Institute of Physics.''As they say, radar won the war and the atomic bomb ended it,'' Dr. Weart said. ''Physicists of the time told me they were regarded with almost supernatural awe. They were the masters of time and space.''Since then, said Dr. Weart, as science has become more abstract, it has grown harder to understand and easier to ignore. But he noted that around the world, as governments grapple with global warming, the ozone hole, declining fisheries and public health problems from foot and mouth to AIDS, there is ever greater reliance on scientific advice.''The issues nowadays are unbelievably pluralistic,'' said Dr. Daniel Kevles, a science historian and professor at Yale. ''There's hardly an issue you can think of that doesn't turn to some extent on technical knowledge.''This fact may, over time, turn science itself into a kind of advocacy group. Already in the United States, scientists have helped build support for particular issues -- AIDS research, for example. And scientists are learning how to organize in their self-interest through groups like the Federation of American Scientists and the Union of Concerned Scientists. An e-mail sent out last week by George H. Trilling, president of the American Physical Society, included a sample ''Dear Congressman'' letter to help members agitate for more science funding. SCIENTISTS are also coming to the realization that, once a scientific matter becomes a public issue -- whether having to do with missiles or birth control or Earth's climate -- how a position is presented and argued may well outweigh pure research.''In an area like climate change, the science at this point is only going to tell you so much,'' said Dr. Robert J. Lempert, a senior scientist and expert in risk analysis at the Rand Corporation. ''And then the question is, how do you deal with risk which is inevitably going to be there. Science is only part of the story.''

President Bush and European leaders made little effort to conceal significant differences over global warming, capital punishment and missile defenses as he visited there for the first time since taking office. The allies were nearly as unhappy about his plans to abandon the Antiballistic Missile Treaty as Russia has been; Mr. Bush met with President Vladimir V. Putin on Saturday. And Mr. Bush's rejection of the Kyoto Protocol limiting emissions of heat-trapping gases was politely but firmly criticized by European leaders, who said they would move ahead with or without the United States. Before meeting Mr. Putin, Mr. Bush called for letting all the democracies of Europe join the NATO alliance eventually -- including states that once were members of the Warsaw Pact or Soviet republics. John H. Cushman Jr.

As the dust settled on President Bush's first official visit to Europe, many experts and newspapers on the Continent called his five-country excursion a success, at least compared with what they had expected.''He proved he was not quite the Texas dolt that everyone thought he was,'' said Josef Joffe, a German foreign policy analyst. ''And he used moderate language. In international relations, that is very important.''To be sure, expectations were so low that some believed that Mr. Bush could not fail to impress. And the trip had no particular goals beyond getting acquainted. Mr. Bush had been derided on this side of the Atlantic with nicknames like the Toxic Texan and Bully Bush for the go-it-alone ''cowboy'' manner in which he decided that the United States would not ratify the Kyoto agreement on global warming and for his willingness to toss out arms control agreements in pursuit of building a missile shield. Those are things that European leaders, including President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, have opposed. By the end of his visit, neither Mr. Bush nor the Europeans moved an inch from their starting points, but the American president gave his Europeans allies at least some of what they wanted: he came offering handshakes, back-slapping, some gentler wording and the promise of future discussion. Mr. Bush's brand of good cheer, first names and small jokes -- for instance, he called Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain ''Mr. Landslide'' -- charmed his hosts from Spain to Slovenia. During a long dinner with European Union leaders in Sweden, he apparently deftly handled a barrage of questions on global warming and defense issues.''Really,'' a Scandinavian official said, ''he left a very positive impression of knowing some facts.''Still, the European press did not miss any of the president's gaffes. Mr. Bush mangled the last name of Prime Minister Jos Mara Aznar of Spain. He made mistakes when he tried to speak Spanish. He kissed Queen Sofia of Spain on the cheek when protocol called for a handshake. In Sweden, he called Africa a nation. But headlines across Europe suggested a softening of tone. ''No More Mr. Unilateralist,'' said The Financial Times of Britain. The left-wing French daily Libration wrote, ''George W. Bush is manifestly not the 'superficial buffoon and arrogant Texan' portrayed in the media.''Editorial writers who 10 days ago were condemning him for a failure to consult suggested that he was proving more flexible than advertised. The leftist La Repubblica of Rome noted that Bush had responded to a question by saying, ''Unilateralists don't sit around tables listening to the views of others.''The editorial went on: ''He did sit at the table. With passion he asked for the Europeans' help in convincing Putin. With humility he asked for their trust, guaranteeing that he would consult at every step.''Charles Grant of the London-based Center for European Reform said: ''The personal stuff is quite important. Europe's big worry was that he was not interested and ignorant. Just the fact that he spent a week here goes a long way.''Experts point out that most new American presidents have been regarded at first with skepticism and derision in Europe.''It's a process,'' Mr. Joffe said. ''They called Carter a peanut farmer, when in fact he was an engineer. They called Reagan an actor in B-movies, when in fact he had run the state of California with a huge economy quite successfully. Europeans have to work out their clichs about Bush, and that has started to happen now.''For many here, it was actually Mr. Bush's last stop -- his meeting with Mr. Putin -- that was deemed the most important, and there again many were relieved to see a friendly encounter between the two men, even if their views seemed intractably apart. Europeans have been much more reluctant than the United States to contemplate moves that might rattle Mr. Putin, like the proposed defense missile shield and the enlargement of NATO to include the Baltic States. But while Mr. Bush and Mr. Putin made clear that they did not agree on those two issues, the tone of the meeting was cordial enough to allay European fears, at least for now. That was something Mr. Bush needed.''Bush and Putin; first good friends'' said the headline in the French weekly ''Le Journal du Dimanche.'' In Russia, too, television reporters cast the meeting as a success, emphasizing how the two men had agreed to visit each other soon. None of this is to say that Mr. Bush's intractability on the issues went unnoticed. His refusal to budge on the Kyoto Protocol on global warming prompted headlines in Germany like, ''Bush disappoints Europeans' hopes: underlines his ''no'' to Kyoto agreement.''One cartoon in the liberal Sddeutsche Zeitung showed Mr. Bush with a big grin and a smoking six-shooter. The headline over the nearby article was ''The Boss -- charming but tough.''Some newspapers said Mr. Bush's reiteration of his stand on the Kyoto Protocol was a contributing factor in prompting the riots that plagued the European Union summit meeting in Goteborg, Sweden. And some experts considered his speech in Poland on the future of Europe to contain some of the ''usual'' American misconceptions. In the speech, Mr. Bush called for the enlargement of NATO and the European Union almost as if they were the same entity. Moreover, some said, urging quick European Union enlargement failed to understand the complexity of the issues involved.''A lot of times, Americans talk about it like you just sign a bit of paper and you're in,'' Mr. Grant said. ''It is a little bit more complicated than that. There are 80,000 pages of documents to go over. You are half way to joining a state. That's why it takes years to negotiate these things.''But European leaders seemed eager to like Mr. Bush, and one measure of their newfound comfort may be that as soon as he left, he was hardly mentioned again for the remainder of the summit meeting.

Over the last week, as President Bush pinged from country to country and prime minister to president, he was in some senses the epitome of diplomatic etiquette. Always, he told the European leaders he met on his first overseas trip as president that he was eager and delighted to hear from them. Always, he stressed his desire to cooperate with them, to learn more about them, to come to a point where they could work blissfully together. It was, in Mr. Bush's stated view, a transcontinental listening tour, the beginning of ''consultations'' -- a word he used time and again -- that would embrace all the important issues and carry through the duration of his presidency. And yet he had abandoned the Kyoto accord on global warming -- and offered no apologies for it. He was launching into more intensive research for, and development of, a missile defense shield -- and demonstrated no equivocation or willingness to turn back in the face of profound reservations from important allies. Over the course of five European countries and five frenetic days, Mr. Bush established an approach to foreign policy much like his approach to domestic affairs: occasionally humble remarks matched by largely unswerving positions, sweet words coupled with hard-line actions.''I look forward to consulting,'' he said at the first news conference of his trip in Madrid on Tuesday, adding that he was eager to ''continue the consultations that have already begun.''''I realize it's going to require a lot of consultation, but I'm willing to listen,'' he said. But by Saturday evening, when he left this country in the northwest corner of what used to be Yugoslavia in its previous form, it was not all that much clearer than it had been at the start what he meant by consulting, or what the fruits of that consultation would be. Compromise certainly did not appear to be one of them. Mr. Bush had come to Europe with several hot-button issues -- global warming and missile defense being the two most prominent ones -- dividing him and his European counterparts, or at least rendering their relations somewhat tense. He left with many of them agreeing to disagree with him, and with Mr. Bush in particular expressing a strong resolve to continue on the path he had already chosen.''It was striking,'' said Ivo Daalder, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, who worked as a European specialist on the National Security Council during the Clinton administration.''Consultation really implies, to many other people, a give-and-take, putting one view on the table, hearing the other view and seeing if what emerges from the disagreement a way forward that satisfies both sides,'' Mr. Daalder said. ''That's not what Bush is about. There's no sense from this trip that he has changed one iota on his views.''Administration officials see it differently. They say that Mr. Bush's concern for conciliation was apparent in his repeatedly stated desire to spend money and lead research on technologies to cut emissions of greenhouse gases and his expressed interest in having European allies, and even Russia, help determine the specific architecture of a missile shield. In regard to the missile shield, Condeleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, said, ''The idea here is that we should have a new security framework. Now, we are open as to what form that takes.''She and other administration officials added that a reason Mr. Bush was trying to bring other countries on board early was so that they could have a say in that form. But these officials never publicly entertained the notion during Mr. Bush's European trip that missile defense itself was up for negotiation, just as they never invited a fresh discussion on the administration's abandoning of the Kyoto accord. Foreign policy experts suggested that part of that seeming intransigence may be attributable to the kinds of bluffs involved in international poker -- to the idea that if you proclaim a willingness to budge before you have to, you may end up budging more than you want. That was Mr. Bush's method as he sought to drive his tax cut through Congress, and he ended up signing a bill very much like the one he proposed. Besides, Mr. Bush was speaking during his travels not just to a European audience but also to Americans, and many of them support American unilateralism and believe the United States should have its way and exert its will abroad. But the line between insistence and arrogance can be a fine one, and the principal evidence of the humility that Mr. Bush has long said should be a part of American foreign policy existed mostly in the politeness of his speech and the frequency of his smiles, not in concessions. He talked one way and walked another, using symbols (in this case, meeting dissenting leaders on their turf or in neutral places) and language to send a message at odds with the substance of his plans. This, too, was reminiscent of his political style at home, of the way in which the decorations adorning his policies sometimes obscure their actual effect. When he was selling his tax cut to Americans, he stood beside middle-class families and talked about waitresses raising children on their own, but the wealthy were by far the biggest beneficiaries in dollars and cents. And he was making superficially nice and jocular with Democrats, just as he did with European leaders last week, without bending all that much to their wishes. It was unclear, after it was all said and done, what exactly Europeans could expect to negotiate with Mr. Bush. When one of the president's foreign policy advisers was asked during the trip about the impact Europeans had made thus far on Mr. Bush's plans for missile defense, his answer concerned the nomenclature of the project. For a long while, Mr. Bush's advisers referred to the project as national missile defense, which implied that it was designed to protect only  the United States, rather than Europe as well.''Europeans came to us,'' the adviser said, referring to the first months of the administration, ''and the first thing they argued was, 'How can you tell us this isn't de-coupling when you use 'national?''''And it sort of stopped the conversation,'' he continued, ''and, frankly, none of us had a really good answer. So we dropped 'national,' because they had a point.''Whether that simple editing will be enough remains to be seen, and some foreign policy experts contend that if Mr. Bush does not do more, he may wind up estranging Europe at a time when its growing unity makes the United States less important to it.''The notion that you can just act in the way you did 25 years ago -- which is that we'll assert our leadership and expect others to follow -- doesn't play anymore,'' Mr. Daalder said. ''Unilateralism has nothing to do with whether you're willing to talk to people. It's whether you're willing to take their views into account.''

Despite his first overseas trip as president and the passage of his sweeping measure to cut taxes, President Bush's standing as a leader on both domestic and foreign fronts has diminished considerably, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows. Far from giving him a political lift, Mr. Bush's European tour, though it drew largely upbeat news coverage, did not appear to help him in the eyes of the public. More than half of Americans say they are uneasy about Mr. Bush's ability to tackle an international crisis, and more people than not say he is not respected by other world leaders. In addition, Mr. Bush's personal appeal -- one of his most potent qualities in last year's election -- has dipped to its lowest point since April 2000, after he was lashed by Senator John McCain of Arizona in the early Republican primaries. And, by widening margins, people say they are less trusting that Mr. Bush will keep his word. The poll found that a majority of Americans seem disenchanted by what they view as Mr. Bush's inattention to matters they care most about. And there is a substantial gap between his stand and theirs on many of those issues, including the patients' bill of rights, education, energy, the environment, raising the minimum wage, prescription drugs and judicial appointments. Sooner or later, the sheen fades from new presidents, but this poll was discouraging for Mr. Bush because on nearly every critical measure tested, he has shown no improvement in recent months -- and often has lost ground. Mr. Bush's job approval rating, which stands at 53 percent, is down seven points from March. His standing is similar to President Bill Clinton's at this point in his tenure. But, unlike Mr. Bush, Mr. Clinton's first months were marked by far more stinging legislative setbacks and political turbulence. Still, as Mr. Clinton showed, Mr. Bush clearly has time to reverse his fortunes. The nationwide telephone poll of 1,050 adults was conducted June 14-18 during various stages of Mr. Bush's foreign trip. Its margin of sampling error was plus or minus three percentage points. There are similarities between Mr. Bush's predicament and that of his father. As is the case today, when the elder George Bush was president, Americans said the country was veering dangerously off on the wrong track -- and there was a widespread feeling that he was not focusing on issues of import to most Americans.''He scares me and I'm uneasy about his approach to foreign policy,'' Jim Carabanas, 57, an independent who was a poll respondent, said in a follow-up interview yesterday. Mr. Carabanas, a painting contractor from Austintown, Ohio, added, ''It's going to take some time until he gets the experience he needs.''''He's surrounded by advisers, but he has the last say,'' Mr. Carabanas said. ''I'm hopeful that somewhere down the line he will be different. Clinton wasn't perfect either when he started, but he found his way.''Bill Willis, 55, a Republican who manages an automobile dealership in Paxton, Ill., was more satisfied. ''So far I'm pleased,'' Mr. Willis said, ''I'm glad I voted for him. I like his character and his honesty. He had a decent track record of bringing about reasonable leadership. He's not one who likes confrontation.''Another Republican, Betty Thomas, 62, a retired stenographer from Buffalo, said, ''His personality -- doesn't inspire a lot of confidence.''''He really hasn't taken life too seriously,'' Ms. Thomas said, ''and I don't think he's taken the presidency seriously either. He doesn't seem to have a lot to say that is specific. I don't think he's going to do much for prescription drug plans or helping the elderly. He seems to be most attentive to big business and, in particular, the big oil companies.''Indeed, on energy and the environment, as well as on foreign affairs, Mr. Bush's ratings are well below 50 percent. His handling of foreign policy is approved by 47 percent of the public; his stewardship of the environment is approved by 39 percent -- a substantial decline from a month ago. And his handling of the nation's energy problems is approved by 33 percent. Respondents were suspicious of the administration's energy priorities because of links between the oil industry and Mr. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney. Nearly two-thirds of Americans, including a plurality of Republicans, say that Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney are too beholden to oil companies, and that they are more likely to formulate policies that favor the industry.''I'm very concerned about the environment and I think he's favoring energy production over the environment,'' said Marjorie Green, 54, a Republican who is a retired lawyer in Satellite Beach, Fla. ''I think he's very much influenced by big oil.''A majority of respondents are skeptical that there actually is an energy shortage. More than 6 of 10 said Americans were being told there was a problem to give oil companies an excuse to charge more money. By nearly two to one, respondents said they favored protecting the environment over producing energy. They said that Mr. Bush takes the opposite view, making energy production his priority. Seventy-two percent of those surveyed said it was necessary to take immediate steps to counter the effects of global warming. While the administration has rejected the Kyoto accord on global warming, more than half the public said that the United States should abide by the agreement, even if it meant that China and India would not have to follow the same standards. There was a wide perception that the Bush administration favors the rich over the middle class and poor, with 57 percent saying the administration's policies favor the rich, 8 percent saying they favor the middle class, 2 percent saying they favor the poor, and 27 percent saying the administration equally addresses the interests of all groups. Mr. Bush is also seen as less caring about the average person than he was three months ago. And his difficulties with black Americans -- who voted overwhelmingly for Al Gore, Mr. Bush's Democratic rival -- seemed to have deepened. Eighteen percent of respondents said Mr. Bush cares a lot about the needs and problems of black people, down from 30 percent three months ago when Mr. Bush was making high-profile overtures to African-Americans. The commanding hold Mr. Bush once had on the public's trust has diminished. Forty-nine percent say Mr. Bush can be trusted to keep his word; 40 percent say he cannot. When he took office nearly six months ago, 56 percent said Mr. Bush could be trusted to keep his word, and 33 percent said he could not. More people are questioning Mr. Bush's leadership skills. Fifty-four percent of respondents say Mr. Bush has strong qualities of leadership, down from 59 percent in February and from 68 percent in October 1999, when he was governor of Texas. Apart from the discomfort about Mr. Bush himself, the public's anxiety about the future of Social Security is as high now as at any time in the 10 previous readings taken over the last 20 years by the Times and CBS News. The respondents said Mr. Bush's tax cut of $1.35 trillion over 10 years would not have much effect on the economy -- and that the money could have been put to better use in programs like Social Security and Medicare. (The tax cut has been approved, but people have yet to receive their rebate checks.)''He needs to be more specific on how he intends to protect Social Security and Medicare,'' said Gary Levi, 60 a truck driver from Denver who is an independent. ''I haven't heard enough about his plan.''The president's difficulties may have tarnished how people perceive Republicans. Forty-six percent hold a favorable view of the party, which is similar to the party's standing in the wake of the contentious impeachment hearings. By contrast, 56 percent hold a favorable view of the Democratic Party. Three months ago, 54 percent viewed the Republican Party favorably. On a host of issues, in fact, the respondents' views are closer to those espoused by Democrats than those of Mr. Bush and other Republicans. Three-quarters of those surveyed want Medicare to include provisions for prescription drugs, even if that means an increase in premiums for Medicare patients. Nearly two-thirds said the program should be available to all Medicare recipients, not just those with low incomes. Seven in 10 respondents favor a patients' bill of rights, even if it means higher costs for participating in health care plans. More than 5 in 10 favor a law guaranteeing people the right to sue their health plan for denying coverage. That figure drops to 5 in 10 when respondents are asked to consider that the right to sue might result in increased costs. More than half the public favors raising the minimum wage to $6.65 an hour over three years from the current $5.15. Another 3 in 10 favor raising the minimum wage to $6.15 instead. Only 1 in 10 favors keeping the minimum wage at its current level. Although Americans favor mandatory testing of students in public schools, they oppose it if the scores are used to decide how federal money for education is allocated. Both the House and Senate have passed education bills requiring testing. Given the closely divided Congress, and the recent change of the Senate to Democratic hands after the defection of James M. Jeffords of Vermont from the Republican Party,  a majority of Americans are bracing for more partisan bickering. Even so, they say they expect Mr. Bush and Democrats to seek compromises. Whatever the outcome, the public says Mr. Bush has more influence over the nation's direction than the Democrats in Congress. Despite the publicity about Mr. Bush sometimes working banker's hours, 53 percent of respondents say he is working hard enough, while 38 percent said he should be working harder. Asked the same question about President Ronald Reagan in early 1982, 58 percent said he was working hard enough and 35 percent said he should be working harder. As often happens with vice presidents, Mr. Cheney, who had an unusually high profile at the start of the administration, seems to have receded. Fifty-nine percent have no opinion of Mr. Cheney, compared with 49 percent in a CBS poll two months ago, while 27 percent view him favorably, and 14 percent view him unfavorably. While Mr. Bush has plenty of time to win over the public, some people do not want to give him the benefit of the doubt. ''I didn't trust him when he was governor of Texas,'' said Shirley Autrey, 55, an independent who is a retired mill worker from Rome, N.Y. ''I don't think he wanted to be president in the first place. I think he got roped into it.''Joyce Bruegteman, 29, a Republican who is an administrative assistant in Sparta, Wis., was more encouraging. ''I feel he is a Christian man struggling to lead his country the best way he can with his Christianity. I'm behind him for that. I know it can't be easy.''How the Poll Was ConductedThe latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted June 14 through June 18 with 1,050 adults throughout the United States. The sample of telephone exchanges called was randomly selected by a computer from a complete list of more than 42,000 active residential exchanges across the country. Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete telephone number, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. Within each household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the respondent for the survey. The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of telephone lines into the residence and to adjust for variations in the sample relating to geographic region, sex, race, age, marital status and education. In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results based on such samples will differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by seeking out all American adults. For smaller subgroups the margin of sampling error is larger. In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll. Variations in the wording and order of questions, for example, may lead to somewhat different results.

The Bush administration is preparing to issue rules on Friday to clamp down on old coal-fired power plants that are the chief culprits in the haze that has spoiled the vistas in many national parks and wilderness areas, leaving the worst blight in Acadia National Park in Maine and the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in Tennessee. A spokesman said today that on Friday, Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, would issue the proposed rules written almost exactly as the Clinton administration wrote but did not enact before President Bill Clinton left office in January. The rules will be published in the Federal Register, beginning a 60-day period for public comment before they are adopted in the fall. Mrs. Whitman said three weeks ago that she would not oppose the Clinton rules. ''Part of the president's commitment to protecting national parks includes protecting the views that draw us to these parks year after year,'' she said then. ''But over the years, haze and pollution have eroded these vistas.''But the White House wanted to review how the rules would affect the nation's energy supplies, and many environmental groups worried that this would give the administration a chance to weaken them. An administration official said today that the Environmental Protection Agency had determined that the effect of the rules on the nation's energy supply, energy prices and reliance on foreign supplies would be insignificant, a conclusion that the utilities are almost certain to challenge as they face hundreds of millions of dollars in expenses to cut their emissions. Environmental groups hailed the proposed rules today as a major step toward helping to improve visibility in the national parks, although they reserved final judgment until the rules are adopted.''If they want to do the right thing, they still can,'' said John Stanton, an air-quality specialist in the Clinton administration and now vice president for air programs at the National Environmental Trust. ''But if they want to gut the rule, they still can.''The rules come at a time when national polls show the public is increasingly concerned over Mr. Bush's commitment to the environment because of what the public sees as his ties to the oil and gas industries and his rejection of the Kyoto agreement, an international treaty on global warming. The most recent New York Times/CBS News poll showed that 46 percent of people disapprove of President Bush's handling of the environment, while 39 percent approve. Environmentalists argue that Mr. Bush essentially had no choice but to adopt the Clinton rules, in part because the national parks are too popular with the public to risk neglecting. They also note that while air quality in some parts of the country has been improving, parks including Shenandoah in Virginia, the Great Smoky Mountains in North Carolina and Tennessee, and Acadia in Maine have had deteriorating air quality.  Acadia has recorded worse smog than Boston or Philadelphia. Congress determined in an amendment to the Clean Air Act in 1977 that the national parks deserved special protection. The rules call for improving visibility in the parks by 15 percent per decade for the next six decades and achieving a ''pristine'' level of air quality by 2064. The rules cover 26 sources of pollution, including power plants, municipal waste incinerators, copper smelters and pulp mills, but the agency has identified power plants as the biggest source of the problem. The rules cover power plants that were built from 1962 to 1977 and emit more than 250 tons of pollutants like sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide every year. The Edison Electric Institute, which represents the utilities, estimates that 580 units (there may be more than one unit at a power plant) will have to be upgraded. Any plant that meets the other criteria and can be identified as contributing to any pollution that limits visibility in any national park is covered by the rules. Because of meteorologic patterns, the offending plants are all over the country, not just near national parks. Pollution particles can travel as far as 1,000 miles. For example, at Acadia National Park, the view of Penobscot Bay is often obscured by smog that includes particles emitted by Midwestern power plants. ''There is no state that is clearly out of this program,'' said John Kinsman, director of air quality programs for the institute. The Tennessee Valley Authority faces one of the biggest clean-up tasks. One of the smoggiest parks is the Great Smokies, the most-visited national park and one with such bad air quality that it has issued more than 100 alerts of unhealthy air in the last three years. On a bad day, visibility there is only about 15 miles. On the park's best days, such as after a big storm has temporarily blown the pollution out, visibility can be as far as 55 miles. The National Environmental Trust recently commissioned a Republican polling firm, American Viewpoint, to conduct a survey of attitudes in three states, including Tennessee, toward clean air in the parks. The results, which were shared with the administration, showed overwhelming support for cleaning air in the parks, even if it meant higher utility bills. The importance of the parks to the public and politicians was reflected in a recent letter from Senator Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee, to President Bush encouraging the administration to support the agency's clean-up rules.''While I do not want T.V.A. to be competitively disadvantaged, I am very concerned about what is happening to the park,'' Senator Thompson wrote. Describing the threat of foul air to the Smokies, he added, ''Most shocking to me is that, according to park officials, air quality in the Smokies is so poor during the summer months that hiking on back-country trails is more hazardous to your health than walking along the streets of Manhattan.''

To the Editor:Re ''The Global Warming Gap'' (editorial, June 17):It is now clear that Europe and Japan will push for the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol. The United States faces complete isolation on this crucial issue. President Bush insists that the United States will not cut back its emissions unless developing countries like India reciprocate. He should know that, despite more pressing priorities like the eradication of poverty and provision of basic human needs, India has drawn up ambitious national programs for energy conservation, production efficiency, cleaner fuels, renewable energy technologies and wasteland management. Mr. Bush, with assistance from American scientists, should engage in serious discussions with Europe on how best to put the Kyoto accord into effect without jeopardizing long-term American interests. SAIFUDDIN SOZ  New York, June 17, 2001The writer is a former minister of environment and forests for the Indian government.

LAST Tuesday morning in the parking lot of Trader Joe's market in Mamaroneck, N.Y., one Lincoln Navigator, one Isuzu Trooper, three Chevy Suburbans, two Dodge Durangos, three Jeep Grand Cherokees, one Chevy Tahoe, one Toyota Land Cruiser, one Mazda Tribute and one Mercedes M-Class sport utility vehicle inched forward and back in an excruciatingly slow elephant ballet. It was 11:40, hot and still, just 10 minutes past the last school pickup of the year. The car silhouettes blurred in the heat, and the faces of the children who had clambered in minutes before faded behind the tinted windows. The fleet seemed monolithic, but the drivers' attitudes were anything but.''I definitely feel weird about this car,'' said Tricia McRae (Suburban No. 1). Gas prices make her feel that way, as does the environmental cost of driving such a behemoth -- front-page news again after all these years. ''Maybe it's always felt a little weird,'' Ms. McRae said. ''But it feels worse now because of the gas crunch. We like to travel, and it's put a damper on all that. When the lease runs out in December, we'll probably go for a station wagon. My husband wants a Miata -- can you imagine? We'd go from the elephant to the ant -- but that doesn't make too much sense with three kids.''Heidi Hanley (Durango No. 2) has three children, too. ''It becomes a juggling act in your head,'' she said. ''Your concerns about your kids' safety with the horrible mileage. I have no conclusions. This is a leased vehicle, and I think about what other car I could get that doesn't guzzle gas. For me, this is definitely an issue connected to what's going on in the White House.''Because S.U.V.'s are less fuel efficient than cars, their runaway popularity has increased America's reliance on foreign oil -- average daily imports are twice as high as in 1981 -- and that has led in part to President Bush's call for drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. S.U.V.'s also pump out nearly three tons more carbon dioxide than an average car in a year, a pollutant that is said to cause global warming, and that issue, too, is back in the news because of the administration's rejection of the Kyoto treaty to limit greenhouse gases. Americans love their S.U.V.'s, there's no question about it, but there are tiny pockets of what Alan Metrick, communications director of the Natural Resources Defense Council, calls ''dis-ease,'' little bubbles of guilt over what was once the very symbol of suburban success. These S.U.V. owners don't sound brazen when they talk about their vehicles; they sound embarrassed.''It's a terrible time to ask me about my car,'' said Ardith Plimack, 39, who lives in Marin County, Calif. She has two children and a new Toyota Land Cruiser. ''I have such a conscience, and at the same time I'm living my life. We used to have a Land Rover Discovery. I was in a terrible accident with it last year. Five kids on a field trip. In the rain. The car was totaled, and none of us had a scratch.''When you have a young family and you're schlepping kids all over the place, you know what starts happening? You start writing a lot of checks to the environmental organizations. Part of me thinks I'm paying Peter to keep robbing Paul.''Sales of S.U.V.'s slid almost 10 percent last year (sales of all cars were down a little over 6 percent, as the economy weakened). ''We know the S.U.V. market is softening,'' Mr. Metrick said. ''You have all these forces hitting this market: the gas prices, Ford making headlines every day. That can't be helping. Our guess is that there is a section of the S.U.V. market that is saying: 'Do I really need this? Isn't it a little bit silly to be driving this thing?' ''In Greenwich, Conn., the S.U.V.'s nestle together in little herds, two or even three to a family. Marybeth Manley has four children, one Lexus LX470 S.U.V. and a Chevy Tahoe. ''I do think it's excessive,'' she said. ''And I have thought we should be driving smaller cars. I didn't like it when Bush said Americans shouldn't have to change their lifestyle. I, for one, feel uneasy. My husband bought the cars.''Emmy Starr has three children and another on the way, a Land Cruiser, a Lexus S.U.V. and a Volkswagen New Beetle. She drives the Beetle to the market when the baby sitter has the children in the Land Cruiser. ''It's the biggest one,'' she said. ''It was the only one that you could fit three car seats across the middle. And it's very safe. But it gets terrible gas mileage. I'll probably have to cave to the minivan thing when we have our fourth.''In Martha's Vineyard, the sins of the S.U.V. are as much aesthetic as environmental. ''Here it's an awareness that they are a bit of a clich, something that goes hand in hand with the big trophy home,'' said Paul Schneider, an island resident and author of ''The Enduring Shore: A History of Cape Cod, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket.''In March, AutoPacific, an automotive product and marketing consulting concern, conducted surveys of S.U.V. owners who had bought their cars since September. It has just compiled the results.''These people don't like their cars -- they love them, a lot,'' said James Hossack, a company vice president. ''They like to sit up high and see where they're going. They're not concerned about the environment or gas prices. Most people aren't seeing global warming, they're seeing less pollution than they ever did before. And if gas prices go up to $3 a gallon, who cares? These people don't. The press keeps talking about mileage, and nobody cares. No, sorry, it's not happening.''Is S.U.V. slippage wishful thinking on the part of environmentalists? Actually, the idea of what makes a car and what makes an S.U.V. is blurring. ''I don't think they're going to evaporate,'' said Jerry Hirshberg, founder of Nissan Design International in San Diego and the creator of the Xterra, an S.U.V. he described as ''blue jeans on wheels.''''People like the bigness,'' he said. ''On the other hand it would be naive to think that the image hasn't been tarnished. My own thinking is that something very interesting is about to happen in the car industry. You keep hearing the mantra about S.U.V.'s becoming more carlike. Well, what does that mean for the car? I think there's going to be a huge shift away from what used to define a car.''In designing the 2002 model of the Nissan Altima, a compact sedan, his team looked at what was ''rational'' about the S.U.V.'s, he said. ''We know people love the high-command seating. And so in the Altima we've raised the seats over an inch. That's a big thing. Changes like that can really stimulate the idea of what a car might become.''James Hall, vice president for industry analysis at AutoPacific, said the market was still S.U.V.-happy, but he noted that ''customers are fickle.''''Personally, and this is my bet, not my company's, I think there'll be a shift and it will come from the next cluster, the so-called Generation Y, the oldest of which are 23 right now. This is the first generation whose parents drove S.U.V.'s. And you know what? No generation before them has wanted to drive its parents' cars if it had an alternative.''MIRROR, MIRROR

The United Mine Workers, once the nation's most powerful union, has declined more than any other labor group, its working membership having plunged to 30,000, from more than 700,000 six decades ago. But now, because of President Bush's coal-friendly energy plan, the union hopes it can end its slide. After endorsing Vice President Al Gore for president, the union is praising Mr. Bush, hoping his plan, which encourages coal production, will enable it to begin reversing a decline in power and membership that paralleled the long decline in the importance of coal.''Now is a very advantageous time for us, not only at the negotiating table but in bringing in new miners,'' Cecil Roberts, the union's president, said in an interview at union headquarters here. Mr. Roberts may be overly optimistic, experts say. The industry is scrambling to increase output in response to higher prices and the construction of dozens of coal-fired power plants, but the bad news for the union is that most coal is being mined in the largely nonunionized West and that companies have become experts in defeating unionization drives.''If the union doubles from 30,000 to 60,000 members that would be quite an accomplishment,'' Michael LeRoy, a professor of labor relations at the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, said. This would still be a far cry from 60 years ago, when the union was at its peak, renowned for its militancy and its legendary president, John L. Lewis.''John L. Lewis was the second most powerful man in the country,'' Mr. Roberts said. ''Only the president of the United States was more powerful.''In Lewis's time the union controlled congressmen and county governments, but with the steep decline in membership has come a steep drop in political influence. Many political experts said Mr. Gore lost West Virginia because many miners bucked their union's endorsement of him, out of fear that he would move aggressively against global warming, crippling coal production.''The union wasn't that effective, obviously,'' David R. Tyson, chairman of the West Virginia Republican Party, said. The union is trying to capitalize on the increase in coal production and prices by asking the Bituminous Coal Operators Association to negotiate a new contract now, though the agreement does not expire for 18 months. Mr. Roberts said the resurgence of coal should make it easier to organize miners after the difficulties in doing so in the 1990's, when the union's membership plunged to 30,000 from 50,000, though coal production increased nationally. Union officials attribute the membership decline to the Clean Air Act of 1990, which required the use of more low-sulfur coal. Coal producers moved from heavily unionized Appalachia to the West, which is rich in low-sulfur coal. With coal prices low and many mines closing in the 1990's, companies threatened to close their mines if the workers voted to unionize.  Union officials say that miners no longer need fear such closings and that the time is ripe to expand by organizing more miners.''I'm sure the nonunion operators will try real hard to keep out the union,'' John David, an economics professor at the West Virginia University Institute of Technology in Montgomery, said. William Raney, president of the West Virginia Coal Association, said coal output was picking up in the East, partly because many new power plants were being built there.''People have more confidence; they've got a smile on their face right now,'' Mr. Raney said. He declined to comment on the union's hopes for a rebound. Union officials were delighted by Mr. Bush's call to build 1,300 power plants and by his rejection of the Kyoto agreement on global warming, which would limit carbon emissions and which union officials say would be ineffective and costly.''I'm not embarrassed to say coal miners should have the right to continued employment,'' Mr. Roberts said. ''I'm not going to run away from defending their jobs.''But he insisted that his union was concerned about global warming,  saying it supported research to find ways to burn fossil fuels without releasing carbon dioxide.

Japanese officials paving the way for Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi's first visit here have warned the Bush team that some of Mr. Koizumi's plans are likely to worsen Japan's economic troubles over the next few years, with potentially major effects on the American economy. In briefings at the White House and the Treasury this week, the officials have told Mr. Bush's aides that a likely effect of Mr. Koizumi's promise of rapid deregulation and a long-overdue repair of Japan's crippled banking system could be a temporary decline in the value of the yen. That poses a vexing problem for Mr. Bush. Although he has publicly welcomed Mr. Koizumi's embrace of the economic changes that a succession of American presidents, including Mr. Bush's father, have urged, a result in the next few years could be to make Japanese imports like cars and steel less expensive in the United States. That could increase competition for American manufacturers who are already dealing with a downturn. Or, as a Bush aide put it recently, ''They are doing the right thing at what turns out to be a very bad moment for us.''With a strong dollar -- far stronger than it might be if Japan and Europe were healthy -- American products are more expensive in foreign markets, and imports are comparatively less expensive here. This year, even as American economic prospects have dimmed and interest rates have been slashed, the world has continued to buy the dollar and sell the yen. The yen's value has declined 7.8 percent against the dollar since the beginning of the year. Mr. Bush is not too likely to discuss this problem publicly when he meets Mr. Koizumi on Saturday at Camp David in a carefully managed visit that is intended to reaffirm the strength of the United States-Japan military alliance. Nor is the White House eager to discuss two major areas of disagreement. One is the administration's determination to extend its plans for missile defense into the Pacific, a move that Japanese officials fear would be a provocation to China. The second area is Mr. Bush's rejection of the Kyoto treaty on global warming. Japanese officials fervently support it, though they say they have no illusions about changing Mr. Bush's mind. When Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain visited Camp David soon after Mr. Bush's inauguration, the two leaders held a joint news conference near the mountain retreat. Japan wants nothing less, noting that in 1993 Bill Clinton used a similar news conference with another Japanese reformer. But White House officials deflected Japan's desire for a lengthy joint appearance, leaving Mr. Koizumi to speak alone to reporters later in the day. The warnings to the administration in recent days have been made through many channels, including by a special emissary, Haruo Shimada, a economics professor from Keio University who went to college with the new prime minister. Mr. Shimada said in an interview that he had warned Mr. Bush's economic aides that Mr. Koizumi's efforts to deregulate the economy and get rid of hundreds of billions of dollars in bad loans still on the books of its huge banks would ''mean more job losses and a higher rate of deflation.''Deflation is the erosion of prices, an economic oddity in postwar industrialized economies, and it can have effects as ravaging and uncontrollable as inflation. All recent indicators show that Japan is slipping into yet another recession. The Bush administration's private position on the prospect of a weaker yen has been that it is willing to accept a weaker currency if Japan puts structural changes in place first. But Mr. Bush's aides are concerned that if Mr. Bush encourages Mr. Koizumi's plan too strongly on Saturday, the yen will be sold off in the markets long before it is clear whether the new prime minister can deliver. Throughout the 1990's, American companies paid little attention to the yen, because with factories running full speed and demand high, the effects of Japanese competition seemed to fade. Congress even paid little attention to trade deficits that were as large, or larger, than those of the 1980's, when they seemed a symbol of Japanese dominance. But now Mr. Bush finds himself in a position reminiscent of the one that vexed his father. American companies, hurting at home, are seeking relief from imports. Mr. Bush has responded, starting an action against Japan and other nations that the administration accuses of ''dumping'' steel here at unfairly low prices. With a weak yen, Honda and Toyota, among other Japanese makers, will be in a better position to to undercut

Michael R. Bloomberg says he supports the posting of surveillance cameras in New York City parks to fight crime, but thinks that another of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's more distinctive initiatives -- erecting pedestrian barriers to control jaywalking -- has not worked. The Republican mayoral candidate says that he would push for salary increases for teachers, police officers and some other public workers, and that layoffs will be among the last things he will consider should the city encounter tough economic times. Drawing a distinct if unstated contrast with the Republican mayor he is seeking to succeed, Mr. Bloomberg makes it clear that cutting taxes will not be a priority if he is in the corner office at City Hall. He declines, though, to rule out raising any taxes. Notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Bloomberg is seeking the Republican nomination for mayor, the candidate on display during a 70-minute interview at his sleek and spotless campaign headquarters last week appeared far closer to his Democratic rivals than to any Republican, including Mr. Giuliani himself.''I have little in common with them on a lot of the national issues,'' he said of the party he joined in anticipation of his first campaign for public office. ''But a lot of the local issues, you know, last I checked, most Republicans believe in taking care of others and being fiscally responsible.''Besides showing little appetite for building on Mr. Giuliani's tax cut plans (and saying that he, unlike Mr. Giuliani, would gladly meet with the Rev. Al Sharpton at City Hall), Mr. Bloomberg stressed his support for abortion rights, gay rights and gun control, as well as his opposition to the death penalty. And he said he disagreed with President Bush's push to drill for oil in the Arctic Circle and did not support Mr. Bush's decision to withdraw from the Kyoto treaty on global warming. At one point, Mr. Bloomberg even referred to himself as a liberal, as he said he disapproved of the suggestion by Alan G. Hevesi, a candidate for the Democratic nomination, that the city consider raising taxes to pay for improvements in the city's school system, should the economy go bad. ''I have a right to be a liberal; I pay a lot of taxes, and it's my money, and I'm happy to do so,'' he said. Through it all, Mr. Bloomberg dismissed suggestions that voters should choose a mayor based on ideology or political beliefs, pointing instead to his business experience. ''You either think that my background and my skills are what the city needs now, or you don't,'' he said. He spoke in a free-ranging discussion in a conference room at his expansive headquarters off Park Avenue, the latest in a series of interviews he has granted about his candidacy in recent days. The round of interviews is part of what his advisers say is a new phase in his campaign: an attempt by Mr. Bloomberg to fill in details about his political views and positions, many of which are unknown even to them. It is also part of an effort to present Mr. Bloomberg, who has had a very unsteady jump out of the gate these last few weeks, as being in command of issues that he will talk about again and again in the months ahead. All of his opponents are public fixtures in New York, and their views and records in office are comparatively better known. Alone among the six major candidates in the two parties, including his rival for the Republican nomination, Herman Badillo, Mr. Bloomberg decided against making the traditional announcement speech in which candidates typically lay out their campaign themes. He sipped coffee during the interview, attended by a single aide. He kept his jacket button fastened  throughout the discussion. He was expansive, though he spoke at a pace that was rapid even by New York standards. He grew animated at one point when the subject turned to criticism of his decision to forgo the city's campaign finance system and use his own money to pay for his campaign. Mr. Bloomberg, the former executive director of Bloomberg L.P., the giant financial information and media company, said he was prepared to spend a large amount of money, but he would not give a figure. His rivals say he has been spending close to $1 million a week on television advertisements. Yet he said he did not think it was possible to win with television advertisements alone.''You cannot buy an election,'' he declared. ''The statistics of self-financed candidates say three out of four lose. And the public is not that stupid.'' He added, ''What money does is buy you media access to get your message out.''Even with that, he continued, ''You have to be out there, talking to people, shaking hands, giving speeches, debating eventually.''In the course of the interview, he took pains not to criticize Mr. Giuliani, whose endorsement he is actively seeking, even as he suggested ways that he would be a different mayor.''I have a very different style,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''Look, I don't want to knock Rudy. Rudy is very good in a crowd. If I were him, what I would have done -- or what I will do -- is to focus an awful lot more on building bridges, if you will.''He did distinguish himself from the Democratic candidates in one area, saying he did not believe that police used racial profiling to identify suspects, though he acknowledged that many residents say such police abuses are widespread.''There is no question that they fear them, but as Rudy would say, the numbers show that they have no reason to fear them,'' he said. ''Rudy can make the case that not only have the police delivered lower crime, but they are under control. Having said that, it is also true that a vast, that a large percentage of the population does not feel as safe with the police, thinks that the police are too aggressive.''He said he was enjoying his first run for public office. ''The other night,'' he said, ''I was out there on Staten Island, and I thought, it will be really sad if you lose, because I love every minute of it.''But he expressed frustration with some aspects of New York politics, like candidates' tendency to talk about national and international matters.''Mayoral candidates should talk about what they can do in the city, with the money that is available, with the political clout, or the power given them by the City Charter,'' he said. ''And if they spent their time on that and let those we elected to the federal government focus on national issues, we'd all be better off.''I'm sure that Chuck and Hillary have opinions on traffic in New York City, but they should focus on immigration,'' he went on, referring to Senator Charles E. Schumer and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton. ''If you want to focus on immigration, run for federal office. If you want to focus on traffic, run for city office. Come on! It's easy to talk about somebody else's problem. That's why things don't get done.''Asked why, if those were his views, he visited with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel here last week in a meeting that was announced on his daily campaign schedule, Mr. Bloomberg responded: ''He's a world leader, he's interesting. Why not go? Did I tell him how to run Israel's government? No.''His remarks reflected one major challenge he faces: to emphasize his Democratic views in a city that is overwhelmingly Democratic, without losing sight of the fact that he has to win an unpredictable Republican primary that involves a far smaller and more conservative segment of New York's electorate. Indeed, the state Conservative Party is about to begin broadcasting a 10-second television advertisement that mocks Mr. Bloomberg for suggesting last week that the job of a sanitation worker was more hazardous than that of a police officer. He left little doubt that his decision to switch party registration was born of pragmatism rather than philosophy, after he considered the chances of winning the nomination of the party he had belonged to for most of his life. ''I certainly looked at it very carefully,'' he said. ''An outsider would have no chance of getting through.''

Meeting in the relaxed setting of Camp David, President Bush and Japan's new prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi, jointly embraced a rapid reform of Japan's recession-plagued economy but carefully sidestepped major differences on global warming and missile defense. The meeting today was stage-managed to emphasize the United States-Japan partnership and to subject the two leaders to relatively few questions about the implications of Japan's economic strategy or their differences on the Kyoto Protocol, the global warming accord that Mr. Bush has rejected as ''dead.''They agreed today that the two governments would explore restarting negotiations on the accord. But in a joint statement Mr. Koizumi emphasized the importance of the 1997 agreement, and Mr. Bush simply acknowledged that global warming was a problem both nations needed to address. The meeting took place as Japan sinks deeper into recession, after a decade of slow growth and a deepening banking crisis. Mr. Bush, aware that his guest faces a crucial parliamentary election next month, heartily endorsed Mr. Koizumi's reform plans.''I have no reservations about the economic reform package the prime minister is advancing,'' he said as the two men talked to a small group of reporters on the grounds of the presidential retreat in Maryland. ''He talks about tackling some difficult issues that some leaders in the past refused to address.''A senior aide to Mr. Bush said the meeting, in a small cabin at Camp David, ''was energetic, with really good chemistry.''The two men spent a considerable amount of time in the ''Maple'' cabin talking about the bad debts that are weighing down the Japanese economy, and which are increasing in size as the recession worsens. But Mr. Bush did not press for details about whether or how Mr. Koizumi's government would finally close failing banks, or pump more money into the banking system -- something Japan can ill afford to do now. Speaking to reporters with Mr. Koizumi, Mr. Bush talked about the experience of banks in Texas in the 1980's, when, he said, ''we acted to remedy a situation in which we had bad loans, nonperforming assets, and there was some pain.'' He said the Texas economy had come back ''stronger than before,'' although economists note a huge difference in scale between the savings and loan problem in Mr. Bush's home state and the troubles of banks in the world's second-largest economy. Mr. Bush did not mention the concerns that some of his economic aides and many Japanese officials have about the short-term costs of Mr. Koizumi's reforms. Japanese officials warn that fixing the banking system, which is sinking under $1 trillion in bad debts, and deregulating the economy could set off unemployment and further deflation. That, in turn, could worsen slowdowns in the United States and Europe. Much as Mr. Bush said two weeks ago that he had searched the eyes of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and found a man he could trust, Mr. Koizumi said he was pleasantly surprised by his first meeting with Mr. Bush. ''I didn't feel at the outset I would be able to establish such a strong relationship of trust with the president,'' he volunteered. In public at least, the two men kept the conversation and the atmosphere light. Mr. Bush and Mr. Koizumi tossed a baseball in front of reporters. But the easy tone could not conceal the magnitude of the problem that Japan and its trading partners face.''On the economic side, everyone is reduced to praying, and hoping that some of the economic reforms can be put in place,'' said Kenneth Courtis, vice chairman for Asia at Goldman, Sachs in Tokyo. ''But the fact is that unwinding the banking crisis will be very difficult, at a time that we remember that unwinding a much smaller crisis in Thailand in 1997 had vast global implications.''At a news conference in Washington this evening, Mr. Koizumi insisted that ''a Japan-initiated global recession will not occur,'' and he said that reviving the Japanese economy was ''the greatest mission'' for his governemnt. But he was not specific in response to questions about how he planned to accomplish that goal. He also said that pressure for reform from the United States did not bother him. ''I will accept it all as advice,'' he said, ''even though at times we may feel displeased. Just as Mr. Bush praised Mr. Koizumi's reform plans, the prime minister was careful not to publicly cross the president on the global warming pact. ''I am not disappointed in the president's position,'' Mr. Koizumi said, although a week ago he said Mr. Bush's stance was deplorable. Today he said that if Washington and Tokyo could cooperate, ''we will be able to create means which will be more effective in dealing with the global warming issue,'' and he said he would not proceed without the United States. Japan is caught between its desire to win passage of the treaty -- which requires industrial nations to reduce to pre-1990 levels emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that cause global warming -- and the strong opposition of its largest trading partner and military ally. As Mr. Koizumi arrived, an American Air Force sergeant was questioned in the rape of a Japanese woman on the island of Okinawa, where tens of thousands of American military personnel are based. The incident was not discussed, the senior aide said, and Mr. Koizumi ''said he understood how important the American presence was for Japanese and Asian security.''Mr. Bush and Mr. Koizumi also announced a bilateral economic initiative, aimed at promoting growth and discussing economic and regulatory reform, foreign direct investment, and market openings.

Japan is in the driver's seat to determine whether a global climate treaty will ever take effect. And supporters of the treaty said yesterday that they were discouraged by the remarks made on Saturday by Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi when he met with President Bush, a fervent opponent of the treaty. At Camp David, Mr. Koizumi said that Japan was willing to work until the last minute to rally support for the treaty, but that in the end it would not proceed without the United States. And responding to a reporter's question, Mr. Koizumi refused to express any disappointment in Mr. Bush. To the contrary, he said, ''The president is enthusiastic about environmental issues and there is still time to discuss this issue.''These and other lukewarm expressions of support suggested that the treaty cannot be enacted without fundamental revisions. The treaty, negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, nearly four years ago, would be the first requiring industrial countries to cut emissions of gases linked to global warming. Still, Mr. Koizumi's statements were nuanced and they may be clarified in talks today with Prime Minister Tony Blair in London, and later in the week with President Jacques Chirac of France. Japan has had a strong allegiance to the proposal in part because it was negotiated in Kyoto, but in bargaining over treaty, Japan has tended to side with the United States against European demands for deep cuts in domestic emissions. At informal talks in The Hague last week, the European Union held to its position that it would pursue ratification and enactment even without the United States, whose opposition President Bush announced in March. But to reach a threshold for the treaty to take effect, Europe would need Japan's support, and officials gave no indication which way the country would go. That appeared to change on Saturday when Mr. Koizumi said during a brief session with reporters, ''Presently, I do not have the intention of proceeding without the cooperation of the United States.''And during a news conference on Saturday night, he spoke mainly of ''the spirit of the protocol'' instead of the document itself, and discussed plans by Washington and Tokyo to pursue talks on other options. The leaders said their countries would pursue talks exploring ways to use technology to combat climate change. That is a favorite theme of the Bush administration, which opposes binding limits on emissions. All of this implies that a fresh start is needed. Yesterday, Bush administration officials embraced Mr. Koizumi's comments as an endorsement of their rejection of the treaty.''The president's approach of pursuing these issues now on a research and technology basis, instead of the completely unfair approach that Kyoto would have forced the United States to follow, is the sensible way,'' Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham said yesterday. And, perceiving a change in Japanese policies, he said, ''I'm glad to see Japan joining us in taking that position.'' He spoke on the television program ''Fox News Sunday.''But Japanese officials worked to dismiss any sense that Japan had settled on a clear change in its posture. ''We are not intending to derail the international negotiations,'' said a Japanese environmental official. He added that Japan still felt it was possible to persuade the United States ''to keep alive the spirit of the Kyoto Protocol.''The official said his government was divided over how to proceed. ''There are still many arguments from within the ruling party that we should ratify even without the United States,'' he said. He and other Japanese officials said they continued to hope that if the treaty's timetable and targets for emissions reductions were adjusted, the United States might consider rejoining the process. Mr. Bush has emphatically said he opposes the treaty because the required reductions could harm the economy and because developing nations are excused from similar requirements. Japanese officials said yesterday that senior Japanese and American diplomats would meet before the next round of formal talks on the treaty, which is scheduled in Bonn in mid-July. In recent weeks, Japan has been playing its cards carefully, and has gained concessions from the Europe Union. And Japan has also concentrated on its domestic economic ills, which were the primary focus of Mr. Koizumi's talks with Mr. Bush. Many other international agreements have entered into force without ratification by the United States, including the Law of the Sea. But barring a sharp turnabout by Japan, a climate treaty with binding emissions reductions is unlikely to be one of them. The Kyoto treaty, negotiated by the Clinton administration, is an outgrowth of a convention signed by the first President Bush and unanimously supported by the Senate in 1992. That document called for industrial countries to rein in emissions voluntarily by 2000 to levels measured in 1990. The binding cuts required by the Kyoto agreement were negotiated starting in 1995 after the world's governments concluded that the voluntary measures were not working. It would require 38 industrial countries to reduce their combined emissions 5 percent below the 1990 levels. But the Kyoto pact has always been extremely fragile. Developing countries only signed on condition that the industrial countries agreed to take the first steps, and the United States all along demanded some form of ''meaningful participation'' by fast-growing countries like China and India. That difference remains unresolved. The European Union, the strongest force seeking ratification, has insisted that industrial countries cut greenhouse gases mainly by reducing emissions from smokestacks and tailpipes. That clashed with the position of the Clinton administration, which sought to gain credit toward its targets by growing more forests, which absorb carbon dioxide, the main heat-trapping gas. Once Mr. Bush rejected the treaty, the path toward enactment grew far more difficult. The treaty can only go into force if 55 countries ratify it, including a group responsible for at least 55 percent of 1990 emissions from industrial countries. David G. Victor, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, calculates that without Japan, the European Union could reach that goal only with a disparate group of partners, an alliance that would get it to just 55.07 percent of the 1990 emissions. That course is highly implausible, Mr. Victor said. ''If Slovakia sneezes, the whole thing falls apart,'' he said. ''They need Japan.''Timothy E. Wirth, president of the United Nations Foundation, former Democratic senator from Colorado who directed climate negotiations for the Clinton administration from 1993 to 1997, said the nuances of the Japanese statements camouflaged what he described as serious damage and delay by the Bush administration impeding efforts to forge a climate agreement.''Now it's up to him,'' Mr. Wirth said, referring to Mr. Bush. ''You can't just move in and kick away the whole structure without offering something in response.''But critics of the Kyoto treaty said Mr. Koizumi's statements had done the world a favor by emphasizing the need to explore the mechanisms of the treaty anew.''We've been saying for a long time that the treaty was headed down a dead-end street,'' said Frank Maisano, a spokesman for the Global Climate Coalition, a private group financed by industries opposed to binding cuts in greenhouse gases. ''The Canadians were whispering this. The Australians were whispering this. For the Japanese to say it pretty much says we need to look at a new approach.''

Good science is supposed to be based on facts, not politics. Dr. John H. Marburger III, the director of Brookhaven National Laboratory, was apparently betting that politics indeed posed no barrier to solid science after the White House announced last week that he was being nominated to be presidential science adviser, a post that has been vacant since President Bush took office. Unlike any presidential science adviser in recent memory, Dr. Marburger immediately made his party affiliation known -- when, in answer to a reporter's question, he declared himself a lifelong Democrat. Considering that Dr. Marburger would be joining a Republican administration as one of Mr. Bush's senior advisers, the declaration has raised new questions about what role science will play in the administration.''Quite candidly I'm a little surprised,'' said Dr. John Gibbons, the science adviser to President Bill Clinton, who held a number of posts in Republican and Democratic administrations but, he says, never formally declared himself a Democrat. He said he was not sure whether Dr. Marburger's avowal showed ''a little political navet.''Dr. D. Allan Bromley, who was science adviser to President Bush's father, also questioned the decision to make a political declaration, saying, ''I certainly don't think it was necessary in any sense.''But politics should ultimately be unimportant, he said, because Mr. Marburger's influence will rest on his ability to deliver unbiased scientific advice and on his personal relationship with the president.''While you hold the position, you simply do not have an agenda of your own,'' Dr. Bromley said. Dr. Bromley, who said he was involved in the search for candidates, confirmed that several potential nominees had taken themselves out of contention. Many scientists have criticized the administration for waiting five months to name a science adviser, saying that its statements on issues like global warming and missile defense betray a lack of technical sophistication. Because the science adviser also directs the Office of Science and Technology Policy, Dr. Marburger must be confirmed by the Senate, something that may not take place until fall. As is customary, Dr. Marburger has stopped granting interviews until after the confirmation hearings. But through a Brookhaven spokeswoman, Karen McNulty Walsh, Dr. Marburger said he was indeed a lifelong Democrat, though not politically active. Ms. McNulty Walsh said Dr. Marburger added that he had worked productively with elected officials from each party at all levels of government. Born on Feb. 8, 1941, in Staten Island, John Harmen Marburger III graduated from Princeton and received a doctorate in applied physics from Stanford in 1967. His research focused on the interaction of intense light with matter. After more than a decade of teaching and research at the University of Southern California, he headed back east to the State University of New York at Stony Brook, serving as its president from 1980 to 1994. During his tenure there and at Brookhaven, he garnered respect from across the political spectrum for his handling of contentious issues.''As an adviser to the president he is absolutely perfect,'' said Dr. Robert McGrath, a physicist, who is provost and executive vice president for academic affairs at SUNY-Stony Brook, and who is also the university's vice president for Brookhaven affairs. ''I just am in awe of what he's been able to do with this laboratory.''The laboratory has already begun a search for a new director. While that sort of praise may be expected from Dr. Marburger's close colleagues, it is largely echoed in much less likely quarters -- the environmental organizations that long had adversarial relationships with the laboratory before Dr. Marburger became its director in 1998. Those relationships arose from pollution problems at the lab, some of them decades old. They included leakage of chemical waste and small amounts of radioactive tritium from part of a nuclear reactor used for research. Dr. Marburger set up a permanent advisory council to make the concerns of the surrounding community on Long Island known to the lab's managers, met with local environmental groups and worked to accelerate the schedule for cleaning up pollution at the lab. Eventually, he supervised the permanent shutdown of the reactor after it was ordered by Bill Richardson, then the secretary of energy, late in 1999.''He's lived up to the enormously tough challenge that he faced there,'' said James Tripp, general counsel of the Environmental Defense Fund. Scott Cullen, legal counsel for Standing for Truth About Radiation, a Long Island environmental group, said that while much work remained to be done in eliminating the contamination, much of the distrust had dissipated. ''To Dr. Marburger's credit, what he did at the laboratory was change the way that the lab interacted with the Long Island public,'' Mr. Cullen said. Dr. Marburger also presided over a scientific comeback of sorts for Brookhaven, where a giant particle accelerator called the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider recently produced the densest matter ever created in a laboratory. The achievement is a step toward understanding the Big Bang explosion in which the universe is thought to have been born. Cleanup money for Brookhaven, increased last year, was sharply cut under the Bush budget, although recent efforts have been made to restore the cuts. Dr. Marburger's record at the laboratory contains broad hints that he may not be entirely in tune with an administration whose environmental stance has been sharply criticized. President Bush cited uncertainties in the science of climate research as one reason not to join the Kyoto accord on global warming. Dr. Marburger has not spoken publicly about that issue, though a colleague, Dr. Robert de Zafra, a physicist and environmental researcher at SUNY-Stony Brook, said, ''Most certainly he is a concerned environmental advocate.''In other areas, like some aspects of energy production, there may be no gap at all. Dr. Marburger, who was appointed by Gov. Mario M. Cuomo in 1983 to lead a fact-finding commission on the troubled Shoreham nuclear reactor on Long Island, is likely to agree with the Bush administration's decision to promote nuclear power as an element of the nation's energy future.''Jack would classify himself as generally being pro-nuclear,'' said Dr. John Bjorkholm, a principal scientist at Intel and a longtime friend. But the tardiness of the nomination could present its own problems for Dr. Marburger. The Bush administration's decision on whether to allow federal financing of research involving human fetal tissue and fertilized eggs -- research that could be useful in treating diseases like diabetes but is opposed by some groups -- could come this month, long before confirmation hearings. And if the hearings drag very far into the fall, the administration's proposed budget for 2003 could already be too far along for Dr. Marburger to influence it very much, said Dr. Neal Lane, a physicist who served as science adviser to Mr. Clinton in his second term.''It's clearly a disadvantage for Jack Marburger coming in late,'' Dr. Lane said. ''I certainly think the community, all of us, should not have unrealistic expectations.''Still, if Dr. Marburger develops a strong relationship with the president and other senior advisers, his voice will eventually be heard, Dr. Lane said. A White House official said Mr. Marburger's party affiliation was unimportant. Anne Womack, a White House spokeswoman, said, ''The White House has conducted a thorough search for a science and technology adviser, and we feel we've found the best candidate.''MAN IN THE NEWS: JOHN MARBURGER

Anyone interested in clearly understanding Japan's position on the Kyoto Protocol on global warming would search in vain through Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi's statements over the last several days, during his first official overseas trip. Mr. Koizumi's extraordinary popularity at home was built in part from his straight-shooter style -- which differs significantly from that of recent predecessors, who were more often given to endless hedging. But from Washington to London to Paris, sometimes on the same day and within the same city, his position on what is probably the most ambitious international environmental agreement seemed to shift by the hour or the audience. Whether deliberate or accidental, Mr. Koizumi's ambiguity appears to stem from a variety of causes. To begin with, this is his first experience on the world stage. Moreover the protocol -- whose name comes from Japan's ancient capital, where its terms were hammered out nearly four years ago after a decade of arduous talks -- represents a rare opportunity for Japan to take the pivotal position on an issue of major international importance. But because Japan has had little experience wielding such influence, it finds itself stuck between firmly formed and opposing schools of thought: those of the European Union and the United States. Japan's self-image as a world power has become increasingly tied to environmental issues, which are loosely linked in the minds of the public with the country's postwar vocation as a kinder, gentler power, constitutionally at peace and devoted to assisting the development of poorer nations. With important parliamentary elections scheduled for July 29, many opposition candidates, and even some members of the governing Liberal Democratic Party, have turned support for the Kyoto Protocol and other environmental issues into campaign themes. Many newspaper editorials have also supported ratification of the protocol. At the same time, Japan is as firmly attached to the United States -- economically, diplomatically and in security terms -- as perhaps any country. Going against its ally on a major issue like carbon emissions does not come naturally for Tokyo. As a new, stirringly reformist prime minister, Mr. Koizumi has yet another important consideration: the need for support from Washington for his sweeping but risky economic restructuring. Mr. Bush gave Mr. Koizumi's plans a strong endorsement, which could prove useful for warding off critics at home. Those strong crosswinds have brought an extraordinary sequence of shifts and nuance and near contradictions from the Japanese leader about the agreement, which establishes a timetable for strictly limiting the carbon emissions of industrial nations. After the talks last weekend between Mr. Koizumi and President Bush at Camp David, Md., the Bush administration, which has rejected the protocol as ''fatally flawed,'' all but claimed that it was indeed dead. In support of that view, administration officials cited Mr. Koizumi's supposed pledge not to ratify the protocol without Washington -- a decision that would leave the accord short of the minimum number of countries needed for it to take effect.''When Japanese politicians go to the United States, they are just engulfed by the American atmosphere, and when they go to places like Camp David they forget their original positions and are often overwhelmed by the agenda of the American side'' said Kaoru Okano, a political scientist and former leader of Meiji University. ''When we saw Koizumi playing baseball with Mr. Bush, we knew he was totally immersed in the American environment.''But while still in Washington, Mr. Koizumi spoke of respecting the ''spirit'' of the protocol. And by the time he reached London, where support for the protocol is strong (as it is throughout Europe), Mr. Koizumi's language had become more affirmative still. Speaking to reporters there on Monday, he said he would ''continue to talk to the Americans so that the Kyoto Protocol becomes an effective document.''Even that, however, was not the final word. Mr. Koizumi appeared to take another step backward on Monday, contradicting his own government's chief spokesman, when he denied that he had discussed possible revisions to the protocol with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain that might make it acceptable to the United States. The distance Mr. Koizumi has traveled in his various statements is all the greater when one considers that just last month, speaking before Parliament, he described Mr. Bush's opposition to the protocol as deplorable. During a photo session in Washington on Saturday, though, Mr. Koizumi praised Mr. Bush as someone who is ''enthusiastic about environmental issues.''Perhaps reflecting that confusion, officials at Japan's environmental agency did not return telephone calls today seeking an explanation. Mr. Koizumi may be trying to avoid making a firm decision now, which will disappoint many at home and abroad. But for now his decision-making process seems to be subordinating strictly environmental considerations to the one issue upon which the prime minister has staked his political fortunes: economic reform.''Koizumi's priority has been economic and structural reform,'' said Yuuri Onodera, an official with Friends of the Earth Japan. ''The environment remains a relatively low priority in his blueprint. This is the first global environmental issue he has tackled, and he has not decided what approach to take.''But the most important reason for his present position is that he needs the Bush administration's wholehearted support for his economic reforms.''

In its first six months, the Bush administration has been examining ways to escape permanently from an unratified international agreement banning nuclear tests, just as it has moved to scrap the Antiballistic Missile Treaty and has rebelled against a global warming pact that it believes would cripple American industry. But State Department lawyers told the White House that a president cannot withdraw a treaty from the Senate once it has been presented for approval. So, administration officials said, President Bush has resolved to let the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty languish in the Senate, where its supporters concede they do not have the votes to revive it. The decision puts the test ban in the same category as the Kyoto Protocol on global warming: by informing the pact's allies that it has no chance of ratification, Mr. Bush is essentially forcing his main European partners to find alternatives more to the administration's liking. Mr. Bush has long opposed the treaty, which the Senate rejected 51 to 48 nearly two years ago in a major defeat for President Bill Clinton. Now, in the next two weeks, Mr. Bush hopes to go a step further and persuade the treaty's allies to acknowledge that the pact is effectively dead. The issue may be discussed at the summit meeting of industrialized nations in Genoa, Italy, later this month. But a senior administration official said today that there was no mention of the treaty in current drafts of the group's final communiqu. Some Bush administration officials even said that the treaty itself might not even come up for discussion for the first time in many years. During the Clinton years, Canada, the major European allies and Japan called on ''all those states which have not yet done so to sign and ratify the treaty without delay.'' Mr. Bush's aides have worked to delete that wording from other international communiqus, while still calling on nations to abide by a nonbinding moratorium on nuclear testing. Behind the arcane change in wording is part of a radical alteration of  American arms control strategy. While rejecting the treaty, the Bush administration is pressing for deep, even unilateral, cuts in the nation's nuclear arsenal, deployment of missile defenses and a new framework to combat proliferation that builds on some current pacts but rejects others. The test ban treaty ''does not help our nonproliferation goals,'' said an administration official who discussed the president's emerging strategy on the condition that he not be identified. He said the treaty ''is cited as providing a new moral and legal barrier to proliferation.''He also said the treaty was also cited as preventing a potential nuclear power from developing a weapon in confidence. ''It is presented as a treaty that is verifiable. And it is presented as something that, in fact, still allows us to maintain our nuclear stockpile in confidence. And I think you'll find that it's wrong on every count, that those contentions are wrong.''As of today, 161 nations have signed the treaty, and 77 of them have ratified it. Among those 77 nations are 31 of the 44 states required for the treaty to enter into force; among the remaining 13 are the United States, China, India, Pakistan, North Korea and Israel. In the absence of a treaty, nations are free to conduct nuclear tests, although a nonbinding moratorium is in place. Administration officials studied the barriers to pulling the treaty from Senate consideration in order to bury it, as well as the potential outcry here and abroad should the United States abandon it. Today, officials said, Mr. Bush ''has no plans'' to do anything with the treaty, but also ''has no plans'' to break from the moratorium on nuclear tests. But treaties do not die at the adjournment of a Congress as bills do, and can be taken up again at any time by a subsequent Senate. Thus, once the test ban treaty was rejected by the Senate, it reverted to the legal property of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Although a Democrat who supports the treaty, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, became the committee chairman when Republicans lost their majority, Senate rules require a two-thirds vote to ratify the treaty, as its proponents desire, or send it back to Mr. Bush for disposal, as its opponents want. The math of the Senate split renders either action nearly impossible.''There is no excuse for our failure to ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty,'' Mr. Biden said last month. While agreeing that there are ''legitimate concerns'' regarding the nation's long-term ability to maintain the nuclear stockpile without nuclear tests and with verification, he said those problems could be resolved before Senate approval. Mr. Bush expressed unwavering criticism of the treaty during the campaign, saying it did not further the nation's nonproliferation policy or strengthen national security, and his administration conducted a review of test-ban issues. In the most explicit inquiry into the president's options, John R. Bolton, the undersecretary of state for arms control and international security, asked the State Department's legal office to determine whether a president had the power to unilaterally withdraw a treaty pending before the Senate, officials said. The legal office reported that the answer was ''no,'' officials said. Once a a treaty is sent to the Senate, there is little a president or a successor can do to dispose of it. Supporters of the treaty criticized the administration's approach, saying the test ban is a cornerstone of nonproliferation efforts and has overwhelming domestic and international support.''Continued U.S. failure to follow through on its C.T.B.T. commitments leaves the door open to a global chain reaction of nuclear testing, instability and confrontation in the future,'' said Daryl G. Kimball, executive director of the Coalition to Reduce Nuclear Dangers. Mr. Kimball said efforts to delete support for the treaty from multilateral documents ''demonstrate that the U.S. is clearly out of step with the rest of the international community on the subject of ending nuclear testing and curbing nuclear proliferation.''He said administration statements ''leave open the option to test in the future, and I think that their current approach of rejecting the C.T.B.T. and continuing the moratorium is simply the most politically convenient approach given the overwhelming domestic and international support for a test ban and opposition to a resumption of testing.''The administration's first major success in altering the allies' publicly stated policy -- though not necessarily their belief -- on the test ban treaty was at the most recent meeting of NATO foreign ministers, this past May in Budapest. The ministers' final communiqu said, ''As long as the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (C.T.B.T.) has not entered into force, we urge all states to maintain existing moratoria on nuclear testing.''The language of that compromise statement was in stark contrast to the previous meeting, in Brussels in December, when the ministers stated, ''We remain committed to an early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and, in the meanwhile, urge all states to refrain from any acts which would defeat its object and purpose.''

Last weekend, The New York Times reported the latest attack by the Bush administration on a major international agreement -- the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, banning all test explosions of nuclear weapons. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz recently raised the possibility of circumstances ''where you would have to contemplate'' nuclear testing, and an administration official told Agence France-Presse that the treaty ''has no support within the administration.'' Meanwhile, General John Gordon, head of the National Nuclear Security Administration, recently informed Congress that he is looking hard at ''improving test site readiness.''The intention of the White House to kill the test ban treaty, if fulfilled, would have deeply serious consequences for nuclear arms control and would constitute a major renunciation by the United States of undertakings it has solemnly made. It also throws glaring light on the extremist views of international law held within the administration. The test ban treaty was signed by President Bill Clinton in September 1996, after its adoption by the United Nations General Assembly by a vote of 158 to 3. (Five nations abstained; nineteen others were either absent or so behind in their dues they could not vote.) The United States voted for it. The three states actively opposed were India, Bhutan (acting under Indian pressure) and Libya. The treaty has now been signed by 161 nations and ratified by 31 of the 44 nuclear-capable, or potentially capable, states named as necessary participants for it to enter into force. A test ban organization has been established, in Vienna, to verify the operations of the treaty. A global seismological network has been set up to detect violations. Until the treaty enters into force, it is universally agreed that a moratorium on testing should be observed. Three years after President Clinton's signature, the Senate decided against ratifying the treaty by a vote of 51 to 48. Senate debate was gagged by the Republican leadership, and the vote was influenced by Republicans' wish to take retribution against President Clinton for winning the impeachment battle. Simply put, there was shabbiness all round, for which a terrible price was paid. This treaty has been sought for almost 30 years. The United States had promised to support it on several crucial occasions during the last 10 years, when failure to end nuclear testing was manifestly threatening the broader nonproliferation effort that the United States said, and continues to say, it considers of fundamental importance for national security. If the United States now destroys the test ban treaty and moves to resume nuclear testing, other nuclear-weapons states will follow suit, and still other states will consider acquiring nuclear weapons. The nonproliferation regime will perish. Not only will the world be made a much more dangerous place in the obvious ways, but it will become a world in which the word of the United States will have been exposed as meaningless. There is such a thing as national honor. However intangible, it nonetheless exists and is the basis for successful relationships between states. The consequences of simply refusing to honor national commitments -- of the United States going back on its word -- are incalculable for American and global security. In May 2000, as part of a regular review conference concerning the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, the United States, together with the four other acknowledged nuclear-weapons states, declared that it remained unequivocally committed to ''the ultimate goal of a complete elimination of nuclear weapons'' and agreed to 13 steps toward nuclear arms control, including aggressive advocacy of the test ban treaty. But that was in the distant days of the Clinton administration. The new team in Washington seems to have declared year zero as far as prior American undertakings are concerned. The attitude of senior figures in the administration to past commitments and to international law seems to suggest that there is no history before them, a ludicrous and dangerous conception. At present, government legal analysts in Washington have prepared papers for senior policy makers on the attitude the United States should adopt toward international law. One such paper posits the existence of a new, threatening concept of international law that would gradually strip nations of their sovereignty, replacing national laws with global norms. International law, in this vision, would become a weapon used by a concert of nations against the United States. The administration's approach is a fearful and misguided one of unilateral rejection. International agreements already in existence and considered offensive, virtually to the United States alone, include the treaties banning land mines and biological weapons, and the accord to establish an International Criminal Court. We might add the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and, most recently, a pact now being negotiated at the United Nations to limit small-arms trafficking. The administration seems to believe that international agreements will increasingly pressure the United States to sacrifice its sovereignty and become subject to direction by international institutions. This argument ignores reality. The United States depends on international treaties for its own safety and prosperity. After all, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is just that, a treaty organization. The World Trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund, the Free Trade Area of the Americas, the United Nations -- all these are based on treaties, and the United States, under normal circumstances, has participated in them, often led them, and benefitted immensely. International commitments do not threaten American sovereignty. If anything, they make possible a measured extension of American sovereignty. Without them we would not have globalization and America would not, in all likelihood, enjoy its present prosperity or, indeed, its power. Until recent months, America has behaved largely as a good international citizen. Fulminating against the dark forces of ''new'' international law can only limit American influence in the international arena. The wiser course now would be for the United States to work to improve treaties where they are flawed and to put its muscle behind gaining universal acceptance of them, to deploy, not withdraw, its sovereignty. If this does not occur, we may well find ourselves at year zero -- on nuclear time. Richard Butler is author of the forthcoming ''Fatal Choice: Nuclear Weapons and the Illusion of Missile Defense.''

The Bush administration plans to oppose an international drive to phase out fossil fuel subsidies and increase financing for nonpolluting energy sources worldwideThe Bush administration plans to oppose an international drive to phase out fossil fuel subsidies and increase financing for nonpolluting energy sources worldwide, administration officials said today. The proposals are contained in a report commissioned by the Group of 8 industrial nations, which will hold its annual summit meeting in Genoa, Italy, next week. The proposals would commit rich nations to help one billion people around the world get their power from renewable energy sources, like wind, water and the sun. The White House says its opposition to the proposals is based on a desire to let the marketplace, rather than government, decide how quickly renewable energy sources are adopted worldwide. But critics say it is yet another instance of the Bush administration's placing the interest of oil and gas companies ahead of the drive to reduce global warming. That debate notwithstanding, the  administration's decision -- along with objections today by Canadian officials, who also oppose elements of the report -- could prevent the G-8 from endorsing the proposals. The group usually works by consensus, and proposals are generally not adopted if any members object. European leaders had hoped to use the summit meeting to jump-start talks on global warming and to salvage what they could of the Kyoto Protocol, the treaty to fight global warming, which the Bush administration also opposes. Some European officials and environmental groups viewed the report by the G-8 ''task force'' as a major rallying point. A final draft copy of the report calls on rich nations to ''remove incentives and other supports for environmentally harmful energy technologies.'' It also encourages them to shift the priorities of international lending agencies, like the World Bank, to support more clean energy projects in poor countries. People who helped prepare the report said one important goal was to persuade wealthy nations to stop promoting fossil fuel projects in the developing world, a step that could reduce sales of power plants, pipelines, drilling equipment and other goods used in producing energy from oil and coal. The effort is directly related to fighting global warming. The task force recommended that the G-8 nations use their public financing leverage with national and international lending institutions to support more clean energy projects. A Bush administration official said the United States did not support the report even though the high-profile task force rewrote it to reflect some American objections. The task force included a number of government officials as well as leaders of multinational businesses and environmental groups. Co-chairmen of the group were Corado Clini, Italy's top environmental official, and Mark Moody Stuart, chairman of the oil giant Royal Dutch Shell. A draft copy of the report was provided to The New York Times by people who support its goals and who want to call attention to the administration's opposition. While the administration supports the idea of expanding use of renewable energy sources, it does not favor the task force's emphasis on government-to-government financing, the administration official said. He said the goal of having one billion people rely on clean energy sources within a decade was a target that had ''no analytical basis.''''While we are committed to expanding the use of renewables, there was a sense that this task force was more focused on government funding -- throwing money at the problem,'' the official said. ''We are more interested in looking at how to leverage private sector efforts.''He said the final communiqu of the summit meeting next week was likely to include language that supports the spread of clean energy even if the report is not endorsed. President Bush announced in the spring that the United States had no intention of meeting targets set in the Kyoto treaty.''By rejecting the task force's recommendations, President Bush is once again undermining any attempt to take serious action on global warming,'' said Daphne Wysham, a fellow with the Institute for Policy Studies in Washington. The institute and Friends of the Earth, an environmental organization, did a study that found that the export promotion agencies of rich nations, like the Export-Import Bank of the United States, are the world's largest public backers of fossil fuels, the main causes of global warming. The credit agencies supported $115 billion in such projects in the five years through 1999, the study said.''About two billion people on this planet are not served by electricity, and the most cost effective approach for them is often solar or biomass, not fossil fuels,'' said Dan Reicher, who served on the G-8 task force as a Clinton administration official. ''But it takes real targets -- numerical goals -- if we are going to make a difference.''The Bush administration official said he considered the task force's emphasis on nonpolluting energy for the developing world as lopsided. He said that as poor nations grow, they will need traditional energy sources as well as renewables.''There is not just one solution to the energy demands of growing and developing economies,'' he said. Among the goals embraced in the final report are several targets for improving or expanding the use of renewable energy. It says the G-8 should aim to help 200 million poor people worldwide use biomass energy sources, like natural and human waste products, to fuel fires for cooking. It also suggests that clean energy sources could eventually provide electricity to 300 million people who do not have electricity today and 500 million more who are connected to an existing grid. The executive summary of the report did not say how many people are now served by renewable energy sources, which includes hydropower. But it called its goals ''ambitious.''Bush administration officials decided early on that they could not support key elements of the task force's work, according to people who took part in the task force efforts. At a key meeting to discuss an early draft of the report, held in Japan in March, an administration official rejected an early draft of the report and submitted a new executive summary prepared in Washington, the people involved said. The task force incorporated some of the administration's views and watered down language concerning numerical goals, the participants said. But it did not accept all of the changes proposed by Washington, and the administration declined to support the final draft.

This used to be a gritty and dirty little town, surrounded by coal mines and factories and overshadowed by a power plant that spewed soot everywhere. But as representatives from more than 170 nations meet in Bonn Monday to begin last-ditch talks to save a treaty to combat global warming, this town provides one tiny slice of the anger and bewilderment that people across Europe now feel toward the United States, whose opposition has all but scuttled the accord. Almost nobody here complains that environmental regulations are killing jobs. Instead, they point with relief to the elaborate filters that have cleaned up the power plant's exhaust. They hike beneath windmills that now provide the city with supplemental electricity. And like almost all Germans today, they meticulously sort their garbage for recycling: paper, glass, plastic packaging, aluminum cans and plastic bottles. But when it comes to the United States, which produces 25 percent of the world's greenhouse gases, they express incomprehension.''It seems to me that the only thing American politicians care about is money,'' said Heinz Kutschker, a retired electrician, as he hiked through the woods here. ''You have one country that is telling everybody else what to do, without any concern for what it means for our grandchildren.''For up to two weeks beginning Monday, the United States and the European Union face off as the principal antagonists over the climate treaty, called the Kyoto Protocol. Saying it would place an unfair burden on the American economy and excuse developing countries from obligations, President Bush has flatly rejected the accord, which would require industrialized countries to sharply reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases. The European Union, in an unusual display of solidarity among its 15 members, insists that the treaty is crucial to preventing catastrophe. And in what increasingly looks like a doomed effort, they are trying to save it. To do that, they must persuade Japan to ratify the treaty. But Japanese leaders have almost explicitly said they will not do so if the United States is not on board. And the United States has repeated that it has no intention of changing its mind. ''We very much appreciate that others are reaching out to the United States and are thinking of ways of engaging us, but we do truly believe the protocol is fundamentally flawed,'' said Paula J. Dobriansky, the under secretary of state for global affairs and leader of the American delegation heading to Bonn. ''We will not be coming back to the protocol.''European leaders are furious, charging that the United States has not only undermined the treaty by rejecting it but also tried to kill it by persuading others to back away.''Why should we let the least ambitious countries define the pace and the content?'' said Margot Wallstrom, the European Union's commissioner in charge of environmental issues. ''It is important to show the public that we can reach an agreement, even without the United States.''That may be easier said than done. The treaty can come into force only if 55 countries ratify it, including a group responsible for at least 55 percent of the 1990 emissions from industrialized countries. But if the world's two biggest economies fail to ratify, the treaty is doomed. For Europeans, that prospect has stoked frustration and anger in ordinary citizens as well as political leaders. At a time when Europeans increasingly embrace American notions of open markets and shareholder capitalism, attitudes on environmental issues and energy by political leaders and the public appear starkly different from those in the United States. And not just in Germany. Denmark imposes a staggering minimum registration tax of 105 percent on new cars. Most countries impose heavy taxes on gasoline, which make it three times as expensive as in the United States. Intense recycling is now common in most countries.''We have in the European community a consensus in favor of climate protection,'' said Jrgen Trittin, Germany's minister of the environment and a member of the Green Party. ''It is not just a Green position,'' he added. ''It goes across the political spectrum, from conservative to liberals.''Mr. Trittin has evidence to back him up. In a recent survey by Emnid, a polling company, 86 percent of Germans said that Chancellor Gerhard Schrder should demand that President Bush adhere to the support for the Kyoto accord pledged three years ago by President Clinton. But even in the United States, there appears to be a broad gap between Mr. Bush's position and that of the public. A recent New York Times/CBS News Poll found that 72 percent of the public believed that it was necessary to take immediate steps to counter global warming, with more than half saying that the United States should abide by the Kyoto accord. But even as they are remarkably unified in their approach to fighting the United States, European leaders and industry groups are still wrestling among themselves over scores of internal issues. The European Union under the Kyoto accord has pledged to reduce its emissions to 8 percent below the levels in 1990. To meet that target, the 15 member countries have hammered out a plan that leaves countries with different burdens, and not everyone is happy about it. Germany, Europe's biggest economy by far, is expected to reduce its emissions by 21 percent. The Netherlands, by contrast, is supposed to cut its emissions by 6 percent. And Portugal, which is trying to catch up to its wealthier neighbors, is actually allowed to increase its emissions. This has left German industry leaders fuming that they have to shoulder too much of Europe's overall burden. They also argue that their burden is disproportionate because the plan does not rely heavily enough on reductions in automobile traffic or household-generated emissions.''Our problem is not with the Kyoto Protocol,'' said Joachim Hein, the top environmental policy expert at the German Federation of Industry. ''What bothers us is that, within the European Union, German industry is being held responsible for so much of the reduction.''Mr. Trittin worries about that as well. ''One thing we want to avoid is that European countries harshly criticize the 'bad guys' on the other side of the Atlantic, the people in the White House, but then behind that criticism essentially behave the same way,'' he said. ''That cannot be in Germany's interest, or in the interest of Great Britain.''There have also been fights within the European Union about the best way to accomplish reductions, like the use of ''emissions trading'' that would allow countries to acquire pollution credits from countries that have room to increase emissions. The disagreements are such that last month the European Commission was forced to shelve a plan to start emissions-trading because European manufacturers and power companies opposed a part of the plan that would have imposed absolute limits on total emissions. There is also argument over how much credit should be given for forest lands that can serve as carbon-absorbing ''sinks.'' In particular, Russia, which is not a European Union member, is hoping to cash in these sinks by selling emission credits to Western companies. But those battles are mainly within Europe. For all the uncertainties, European leaders have shown little disagreement about how to confront the United States. In an interview at her office in Brussels last week, Ms. Wallstrom said Europe was ready to offer Japan sweeteners that would make its own targets easier to reach. She also suggested that the United States was trying to sabotage the treaty by persuading Japan not to sign it.''They are putting pretty heavy pressure on their partners,'' Ms. Wallstrom said, but added that the United States had promised not to ''obstruct'' the Bonn negotiations. Some European industrial companies are openly calling on the United States to support the Kyoto Protocol. Earlier this month, Germany's Federation of Chemical Industry, which includes conglomerates like BASF A.G. and Bayer A.G., urged the United States to rejoin the process. Ms. Wallstrom, Europe's commissioner for the environment, who is Swedish, captured the difference between American and European attitudes toward tougher rules.''Maybe it is too difficult for American politicians,'' she mused. ''Is it possible for political leaders in the U.S. to say you can't have two or three cars or that you can't drive to the post office box?''In Eschweiler, which is in the Ruhr Valley and the heart of heavy industry, Mayor Rudolf Bertram said he had seen a profound transformation during the past 20 years.''Twenty years ago, this city didn't have anybody who dealt with environmental issues,'' he said. ''Today, we have a whole department and they get involved in everything -- construction, industrial development, noise abatement.''Recycling is mandatory, and residents have to sort their waste into at least four categories. Indeed, Germany's ''green dot'' program for recycling paper and plastic packaging has become a $2 billion enterprise.''But what has changed even more intensively is the attitudes of the people,'' Mr. Bertram said. ''They want something done for environmental protection, and they know environmental protection doesn't stop at the border.''Peter Hllen, a retired coal-mine engineer, hardly considers himself a radical environmentalist. But as he hiked through the woods, he found it hard to hold back his bewilderment about the United States.''How much do the Americans really know about climate problems?'' he asked. ''Do they know anything about these issues? Do they have any interest in them? What are they thinking?''

INTERNATIONALA3-7U.S. Reviews Russian Aid In Light of Security Issues  A Bush administration review of American assistance to Russia concluded that most of the programs aimed at helping Russia stop the spread of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons are vital to American security and should be continued, and some even expanded, an administration official said. A1Chinese Leader Visits Moscow  President Jiang Zemin of China arrived in the Russian capital for a state visit that is to culminate with the signing of a treaty on friendship and cooperation. It will be the first such pact since 1950, when Moscow and Beijing allied themselves against the West. A7Clues to Fate of 3 Americans  The Serbian authorities have found what may be the remains of three Albanian-Americans from New York who were arrested and apparently executed under Slobodan Milosevic's government shortly after the end of NATO's war against Yugoslavia. A7Israelis Bury Land Proposals  The Israeli government formally buried the idea of land exchanges with the Palestinians, a concept that was raised during the peace talks at Camp David a year ago. A6India-Pakistan Discussions  India's prime minister and Pakistan's military ruler had their first face-to-face meeting and private negotiations in Agra after a two-year standoff over Kashmir. A6U.S. Envoy Ends Hanoi Tenure  America's first postwar ambassador to Vietnam, Pete Peterson, ended his four-year tenure. A trade agreement is expected to be ratified soon in Washington and Hanoi. Mr. Peterson, a former prisoner in Hanoi, said he felt he had helped build ''respectful and, really, normal relations.''A4SCIENCE/HEALTHGlobal Warming Talks  Representatives from more than 170 nations meet today in Bonn to begin last-ditch talks to save a treaty to combat global warming. The United States and the European Union face off as the principal antagonists over the climate treaty, called the Kyoto Protocol. A3NATIONALA8-12Push for Energy Plan Starts But Prices Are Going Down  The Bush administration is starting a campaign-style push to drum up support for its energy plan this week, but the sense of crisis that had propelled the plan forward has receded while energy shortages ease and fuel prices fall. Gasoline prices have been going down for six weeks straight and now average $1.47 a gallon, compared with $1.71 a gallon when the administration unveiled its energy strategy in May. A1Fired Sunbeam Chief's Secret  Albert J. Dunlap wowed Wall Street when he was the chief executive of Sunbeam. His memoir became a best seller. Then, in 1998, he was fired and confronted with fraud allegations. Neither Sunbeam nor the Securities and Exchange Commission, both of which claim he acted fraudulently, knew that a quarter of a century ago Mr. Dunlap had faced similar accusations. They are detailed in court records obtained from the National Archives, where they had been stored for years. A1Bush Plans Tax Code Overhaul  President Bush, having achieved his goal of a substantial tax cut, is making plans to address the even more ambitious and divisive issue of overhauling or replacing the entire federal tax code. A1Cotton Making a Comeback  For the first time in 37 years there are more acres of cotton planted in Mississippi than soybeans, there are 30 percent more white bolls emerging in the state than there were last year, and there are double-digit increases in planting in Arkansas, Louisiana and North Carolina. A9Muted Optimism on Missile  The United States military has succeeded for only the second time in shooting down an intercontinental ballistic missile, but Pentagon officials warned that much more development will be needed before the technology can reliably destroy real weapons. A8News Executive Hurt in Fall  Katharine Graham, 84, chairwoman of the executive committee of The Washington Post Company, was in critical condition at a hospital in Idaho after surgery that followed a fall, the paper reported. A12NEW YORK/REGIONB1-5Fugitive in Carnegie Case Arrested at Miami Shelter  The authorities arrested the man wanted in the execution-style killing of three people in a drug robbery above the Carnegie Deli, tracking him to a Miami homeless shelter based on calls to the ''America's Most Wanted'' television show. The arrest of the fugitive, Joseph Sean Salley of Crown Heights, Brooklyn, put behind bars the second of two suspects in the May 10 killings, which turned the teeming Midtown theater district into a crime scene. The brutality of the crime, in which police say five people were shot in the head despite offering no resistance, jolted many New Yorkers after years of declining murder rates. The man accused of being Mr. Salley's accomplice, Andre S. Smith, 31, of Irvington, was arrested on May 22. B1Sex and the Ex-Soviets  A film about immigrant life in Brooklyn written, produced and acted by New York-area immigrants from the former Soviet Union has roiled the city's Russian-speaking community. Its producer, who is negotiating with Russian television stations and hopes to turn the film into a series, describes its plot as a cross between ''The Sopranos'' and ''Sex and the City.''A1Town Hit by Layoffs  The bottom has dropped out of an economic boom in Corning, N.Y., with Corning Inc. laying off about 1,000 people in the town of 11,000 after one of the businesses in the company's high-tech transformation fell apart. The company has stopped paying dividends to shareholders for the first time since 1945. B1ARTSE1-8Leonard's List  The prolific American novelist Elmore Leonard offers a Top 10 list of rules for writers and sums them up with one more: If it sounds like writing, rewrite it. And, drawing on John Steinbeck, he sounds a warning against losing readers by indulging in ''a bunch of hooptedoodle.''E1What the Moves Mean  Like other performing arts, dance is sharpening its marketing skills. In the meantime no dance seems to go unexplained. The needs of the most grizzled dancegoers are now attended to with everything from pre- and post-performance talks to lively information-age Web sites complete with dance-related games. The education of audiences has become an industry. E1SPORTSMONDAYD1-8OBITUARIESB7Meyer P. Potamkin  A Philadelphia banker and philanthropist who assembled one of the country's finest private collections of American art, he was 91. B7BUSINESS DAYC1-12AT&T Cable Talks Are Seen  Despite the company's statements that its cable television arm is not for sale, people close to AT&T say it is considering potential deals. C1Book Ads Plug Cleanser  An advertising campaign for Strivers Row, a new line of books from Random House aimed at black readers, is creating a stir among black authors and agents because the advertisements double as plugs for Pine-Sol, the household cleanser. C1Private Suits and Microsoft  The court decision upholding a ruling that Microsoft had violated antitrust law aided the dozens of lawsuits customers have filed against the company. But many experts said it might be premature to assert that private suits could curb its behavior. C1Reality Check for Big Brother  A quick check of court records after Justin Sebik, a bartender from Bayonne, N.J., was removed from CBS's Big Brother 2 for holding a knife to the throat of a woman on the show found that a Justin Sebik, with the same Social Security number as the person on the show, had been arrested five times, including three times for simple assault. CBS said its background check had found no record of assault arrests. C8Business DigestC1EDITORIALA14-15Editorials: Florida's flawed ballots; the new Pentagon war strategy; a rocky road for AT&T.Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert. BridgeE4  Public LivesA8  CrosswordE4  TV ListingsE7  Metro DiaryB2  WeatherA13

For the second time in six weeks, President Bush, having rejected the Kyoto Protocol on climate change, is headed to Europe without a strategy on global warming, an issue of deep concern to America's allies. European leaders will try to use the forthcoming Group of Eight summit meeting of industrialized nations in Genoa to persuade Mr. Bush to relax his opposition to Kyoto. Meanwhile, environmental ministers from a wider array of countries will be making the same case to Paula Dobriansky, the assistant secretary of state representing the administration at climate change talks in Bonn. The Europeans should not get their hopes up. Mr. Bush described Kyoto last month as ''fatally flawed'' because it would damage the American economy, and he has not changed his mind. Ms. Dobriansky thus has the unfortunate distinction of being the first American climate change negotiator with no negotiating position. For all its flaws, the Kyoto Protocol represented an important consensus that the harmful consequences of climate change could be averted only if the nations of the world -- with the richer countries taking the lead -- agreed to mandatory reductions in carbon dioxide and the other gases thought to cause the warming of the earth's atmosphere. The treaty is cumbersome and its targets need refinement. But it outlined a plausible framework for action for which Mr. Bush has provided no alternative except for a few measures announced last week calling for further research. If Japan decides to ratify the treaty, America's isolation will be complete. Fortunately, there has been a reassuring surge of interest in global warming on Capitol Hill. With the growing support of progressive voices in the electric power industry, three senators with pivotal roles in energy policy -- Jim Jeffords of Vermont, Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut and Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico -- are pushing legislation that would reduce emissions of all four of the main pollutants from power plants, including carbon dioxide. They have also promised that any energy legislation emerging from the Senate will include serious money for energy efficiency and renewable energy sources. In addition, two senators not normally thought of as environmentalists -- Ted Stevens of Alaska and Robert Byrd of West Virginia -- have proposed investments in new technologies aimed at producing cleaner fuels and industrial processes. Potentially the most important development, however, was a report from a National Academy of Sciences panel recommending a sharp improvement in fuel economy standards for cars and vehicles classed as light trucks, like the popular but inefficient S.U.V.'s. The recommendations, disclosed in Tuesday's Times by Keith Bradsher, are noteworthy because the panel was dominated by industry representatives and because Mr. Bush has promised to pay attention to its findings. Fuel economy standards have not been raised in 17 years. Indeed, the average miles per gallon of the American fleet have actually declined because of the popularity of S.U.V.'s and minivans. Scientists believe that improving vehicle mileage would be the biggest contribution America could make to cutting emissions of global warming gases. Cars and light trucks consume about 40 percent of the oil used in the United States and account for more than one-fifth of the carbon dioxide emissions. The panel recommends that the fuel economy of all new vehicles be raised as much as 11 miles per gallon over the next 10 years, a 40 percent improvement over today's levels. That is a more ambitious target than anything the automobile industry or Mr. Bush has agreed to. Nevertheless, the recommendations will give a boost to the Democrats and moderate Republicans who plan to introduce fuel economy legislation, and it certainly puts the administration on the spot. Vice President Dick Cheney, chastened by criticism of the administration's resource-driven energy strategy, is now saying all sorts of nice things about the need for conservation. The administration's response on fuel economy will say much about whether he means what he says. Editorial  Correction:  July 21, 2001, Saturday  An editorial on Thursday incorrectly identified Paula Dobriansky, who is leading the United States delegation at the global warming talks in Bonn. She is the under secretary of state for global affairs, not an assistant secretary. An editorial yesterday incorrectly referred to Representative Sherwood Boehlert of New York as Sherwin. Correction: July 21, 2001, SaturdayAn editorial on Thursday incorrectly identified Paula Dobriansky, who is leading the United States delegation at the global warming talks in Bonn. She is the under secretary of state for global affairs, not an assistant secretary. An editorial yesterday incorrectly referred to Representative Sherwood Boehlert of New York as Sherwin.

To the Editor:Re ''Clueless on Global Warming'' (editorial, July 19):The real issue is about global development, not just reducing greenhouse gases. Rather than focusing the debate over the Kyoto Protocol on how much to reduce greenhouse gases, we might better address how industrialized and modernizing countries can develop in ways that reduce environmental impact per unit of economic growth. Over the last decade, many countries have been able to improve both environmental and economic performance through ''eco-efficient'' investments -- choosing methods and technologies that promote environmental quality, reduce costs and generate short-term profits. Understanding the issue this way could frame a more productive debate. OWEN CYLKE  Washington, July 19, 2001The writer is a senior adviser, National Environmental Policy Institute.

To the Editor:Re ''The New Laws of Nations,'' by Laura D. Tyson (Op-Ed, July 14): While it is the case that an increasingly global economy will require multinational solutions, what kind of international governance will we choose and whom it will benefit? The Kyoto Protocol on climate change and other environmental treaties represent the type of approach we require to sustain the environment and improve social standards. In contrast are harmful multinational approaches like the investor-rights provisions in the North American Free Trade Agreement, which are being used by multinational investors to sue governments for enacting environmental and other public interest protections. Although we must embrace multilateral solutions that raise environmental and social standards, we should also reject those that pull them downward. DAVID WASKOW  Washington, July 15, 2001The writer is trade and investment policy coordinator, Friends of the Earth.

Twenty-five miles south of Charleston, W. Va., the Appalachians look as they must have a thousand years ago, rapturously folded against each other and densely covered with trees. Down a gently sloping mountainside, a conveyor belt angles toward four coal-storage bins that resemble farm silos. I exit onto a roughly-paved road and arrive at a small white guardhouse near a wooden sign: ''Hobet 21.''It doesn't look like much. But in fact Hobet 21 covers some 12,000 acres, almost all of it hidden from easy public view by foliage and mountain ridges. Hobet 21 is owned by Arch Coal, America's second-largest coal company, with mines throughout Appalachia and the West. Arch will dig up 100 million tons of coal this year, with six million coming from Hobet 21. Almost half the coal Arch digs in Appalachia will be obtained by a controversial method known as ''mountaintop removal.'' Instead of digging the coal out of the mountains in subterranean shafts, as miners used to do, workers today -- with the help of enormous machines called draglines that scoop 100 tons of earth and rock at a time -- simply remove the mountains from the coal. It's hell on the owls and frogs and human beings who live in the vicinity, but it's remarkably efficient. At the guardhouse, I'm greeted by Larry Emerson, director of ''environmental performance'' for Arch. A tall, rangy West Virginia native dressed in jeans and a baseball hat, he is deliberate in his good cheer. ''Welcome to our world,'' Emerson says, pumping my hand firmly. ''I hear you want to see where electricity comes from.''I follow Emerson's Dodge 4 by 4 up the hill. Looking at the coal-handling machinery -- the silos where coal is washed of impurities, the loading deck where it is funneled into rail cars -- I feel as if I'm passing through a theme-park exhibit about How Life Used to Be in America. All that's missing are pickaxes and mules. I'm also amazed by the tall piles of glistening rock; coal has a reputation as a filthy fuel, but in its raw state, it is shiny and pitch-black lovely. After a short drive, we suddenly come to a huge barren area -- a man-made plateau. In the center of this wide-open field, near some rusty trailers, is the mining office. It feels strangely exposed up here. West Virginia is all hollows and shadows and twisting roads. This is a different planet. We park near the office, and Emerson, who has supervised the planting of trees on reclaimed mine land, hands me some P.R. material touting Arch's environmental accomplishments. As we chat, a siren goes off in the distance. A moment later, there's a boom. The earth trembles; a rabbit dashes across the parking lot and dives under a bush. A plume of smoke rises on the horizon.''They're blasting,'' Emerson explains matter-of-factly. Yes, they are -- blasting, booming and raking in the dough. Big Coal simply can't believe its luck. For decades, the industry seemed to be dying. First, the use of coal for industrial applications, like steel making, was phased out. In the late 70's, utility companies began switching from coal to natural gas, which was plentiful, more efficient and less of an environmental nightmare. During the 80's and 90's, coal prices flattened. Profits, if there were any, were measured in pennies per ton. Then, unexpectedly, what one analyst has called ''the Perfect Storm'' hit the energy industry. Rolling blackouts in California demonstrated that electricity is not something that's created by wall outlets; the price of natural gas shot up to $10 from $2.50 per million B.T.U.; and finally, George W. Bush of Texas, the state that consumes more coal than any other in the country, together with Dick Cheney, who hails from the largest coal-producing state in the country, won the White House. Two months after taking office, in an about-face that outraged environmentalists, President Bush ''clarified'' his campaign pledge to begin regulating carbon-dioxide emissions from power plants, effectively killing the international Kyoto treaty on global warming. Considering that American coal-powered plants pump 2.3 billion tons of CO2 into the air each year -- twice as much as the amount emitted by cars -- Bush's turnaround was a godsend. Then in May, the administration announced an ''energy plan'' that openly championed coal, positioning it as America's favored source of electricity generation for decades to come. To anyone who believes that technological progress moves in a straight line, this has been a weird turn of events. It's as if a wormhole opened in the cosmos and we slid back to the 1890's. Isn't this the dawn of the 21st century? Why are we burning rocks to charge our cell phones? Even before the boom, coal-fired power plants still produced more than 50 percent of the electricity in America. And Big Coal may soon have an even bigger share: 22 new coal-powered plants have been proposed just in the last few months. The price of coal has more than doubled since February, while the stock prices of industry leaders like Arch and its rival, Peabody Energy, have shot up like dot-coms of yore. Flush with cash, Big Coal is now working to wipe some of the soot off its image. The National Mining Association now refers to coal, which is formed from ancient plant matter, as ''buried sunshine.'' One industry-financed advertisement features a kid standing on a pitcher's mound in a lighted stadium, alongside the slogan ''Electricity from coal: Essential, affordable, increasingly clean.'' It's a deft phrase, considering that in 1999 American coal-fired utilities filled the air with 18 million tons of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, down from 21 million tons in 1990. (These chemicals are the major cause of acid rain.)Part of the new spin on coal is that it's the engine behind the New Economy. Industry executives never tire of suggesting that, without coal, there would be no semiconductors, no Internet. The first time I talked to Bill Raney, the powerful president of the West Virginia Coal Association, he said, apropos of nothing, ''Did you know that it takes more energy to charge up a Palm hand-held than it does to power a refrigerator for a month?'' It turns out Raney's claim is a bit exaggerated; a Palm is roughly 1,500 times less power hungry than a refrigerator. But Big Coal loves such hyperbole. The West Virginia Coal Association's Web site boldly claims that ''the process of ordering a book from Amazon. com uses about a half of a pound of coal'' and that computers and the Internet suck up 13 percent of the electricity in America. In fact, the best studies suggest that such activities consume only 3 percent of the nation's electricity. To Big Coal's critics, none of these exaggerations are surprising. ''The coal industry has been telling lies for years,'' says Carolyn Johnson, staff director of the Citizens Coal Council, a Denver-based environmental group. The notion that coal is ''increasingly clean'' galls David Hawkins, director of the National Resources Defense Council's Climate Center. ''When we tried to pass acid-rain legislation, the industry fought us every step of the way for 10 years,'' Hawkins says. ''Now, because laws have forced sulfur-dioxide emissions to go down, they're crowing about it as if it were their accomplishment.'' To some, the sins of the coal industry go even deeper. ''Coal is not only wrecking my state,'' cries Larry Gibson, a local activist whose ancestral home has been surrounded by mountaintop-mining operations. ''It is wrecking the planet! How much longer are we going to let them get away with this?''That's a question many people are asking, especially in the halls of Congress. A series of political battles is shaping up that will outwardly be about power-plant pollution and greenhouse gases but in fact will amount to a kind of character test for the coal industry. The captains of Big Coal want us to believe that they have turned over a new leaf, that the old days of black lung and billowing smokestacks and the wanton destruction of nature are over. They know that it's wise to adopt a public pose of reform. But now that the Bush administration has placed them at the head of America's energy table, Big Coal's top players are lobbying behind the scenes for a loosening of regulations. The stakes in this largely ignored battle are enormous -- not only for the coal industry, but also for anyone who cares about clean air and cheap electricity.''This is an important moment for us,'' says Jack Gerard, president of the National Mining Association, the industry's main lobbying group. ''We have to seize this opportunity and prove to the world that we are a new industry -- hopeful, open, technologically sophisticated and environmentally sensitive.''It's going to be a big job. The National Mining Association Building squats on a prime piece of real estate in Washington. The Mayflower Hotel, site of many power breakfasts and illicit rendezvous, is right across the street. The building itself, a square, solid box of black stone, was modeled on the headquarters of the National Rifle Association and looks as if it could withstand nuclear attack. Inside, it's freeze-framed from the 1970's, with harsh linoleum and steel doors. Jack Gerard's office on the top floor has a few power-politician touches, like a high-backed leather chair and a conference room off to one side. A watercolor of a mining operation -- imagine coal barges painted by a shopping-mall Monet -- hangs beside his desk. On the windowsill sits a toy bulldozer and excavator. There is an industrial frankness to it all; it's prespin America. Gerard, 42, is friendly and warm, dressed in a crisply pressed white shirt and expensive loafers. He has salt-and-pepper hair, a manly handshake and a manner that's insistently familiar. ''Excuse me, things have been a little chaotic around here,'' he says, dashing out to hand some papers to his assistant and double-check his afternoon schedule. A former high-powered political consultant and legislative director for Senator James McClure, Republican of Idaho, Gerard has been at this job for only about eight months, and you get the feeling that this new coal-fired life is even hotter than he expected. Earlier today, he had lunch with the owner of a Western coal company who is thinking about the feasibility of building a new coal-fired power plant in Wyoming and shipping the electricity to California; this afternoon, he says he has been ''keeping tabs'' on what's going on over in the House of Representatives, where the Commerce Committee is beginning to mark up an energy bill. But Gerard, despite all the nagging details of his day, really has his eye on the big picture for the coal industry. And increasingly, that big picture is focused on a tiny section of the Clean Air Act called New Source Review, which prohibits power-plant operators from expanding old plants without also installing state-of-the-art pollution-control devices. Later this summer, the Bush administration may recommend the dismantling of New Source Review -- and Big Coal is doing everything it can to make that happen. While it sounds arcane, the conflict over New Source Review is in fact a profound challenge to Big Coal. If the regulations are upheld and enforced, satisfying their stringent environmental requirements could cost the industry billions of dollars. More important, executives worry that if the environmentalists win this battle, it could ultimately lead to a whole lot less coal being burned in the United States. And less coal burned means less coal mined, which is why Jack Gerard is concerned. ''This is a big issue for us,'' he says frankly. The roots of this conflict go back more than 25 years. When the Clean Air Act, which restricted pollution from smokestacks, was amended in 1977, utilities fought for and won an exemption for their aging power plants. The reasoning was that it would be too costly to upgrade older plants to meet the Clean Air Act's strict requirements and that the plants would be retired soon anyway. It didn't quite work that way. Many old belchers are still running full tilt. In the mid-90's, regulators suspected that many power-plant operators were evading the spirit, if not the letter, of the law by installing new parts that prolonged the lives of the old power plants while at the same time avoiding pollution upgrades. In 1999 and 2000, the Department of Justice, on behalf of the Environmental Protection Agency, filed suit against a total of 51 power plants, charging them with violating the Clean Air Act. A number of states, mostly in the Northeast, and various environmental groups piled on with lawsuits of their own. Currently, American Electric Power, one of the largest utilities in the country, is being sued not only by the E.P.A., but also by eight states and 17 environmental groups.''The effect of all this litigation,'' Gerard tells me, ''was to chill the industry. No one wanted to upgrade or maintain their power plants because they were afraid of getting sued.''Meanwhile, Big Coal's aging power plants have cranked up the juice. Electricity from old, heavily-polluting coal-fired power plants rose 15.8 percent between 1992 and 1998, an increase big enough to power California for a year. In a single year, 1998, these old machines dumped 755,000 tons of nitrogen oxides into the atmosphere -- the same amount of smog-forming pollution emitted by 36 million cars. (Overall, the industry has increased its CO2 output by 20 percent since 1990.)Although the details are complex, the larger issue at stake in the battle over New Source Review is straightforward: how long should these old power plants be allowed to continue spewing pollution with impunity? As some observers see it, the industry wants to delay reform indefinitely.''These utilities have a deliberate strategy in place,'' one industry consultant explains. ''They're just going to keep running the plants as hard as they can while fighting the lawsuits in court. They know that eventually they will lose, but the longer they can drag it out, the more money they can make.''Last summer, Big Coal got a break from an unexpected front: California, a state that has long been anticoal. After the state's rolling blackouts hit, suddenly everyone was talking about power plants -- not how filthy they are but why there aren't more of them. Although California's troubles were in fact caused more by half-baked deregulation than any shortage of generating capacity (one recent study points out that the many blackouts occurred when demand was only 75 percent of available supply), it's much easier to cry for more power than it is to unravel the complex tangle of California energy politics. The White House's trumpeting of the energy crisis helped to feed the myth that America desperately needs additional sources of energy, clean or no. To take advantage of this fortuitous turn of events, the National Coal Council, a federal advisory committee that critics claim is stacked with coal-industry representatives, cranked out a ''white paper'' about how to squeeze even more electricity out of those old power plants. Among the conclusions the report reached was that the E.P.A. lawsuits had a ''direct and chilling effect'' on the operation of the industry's coal-fired power plants. The Coal Council's paper was delivered to Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham, who passed it to Vice-President Dick Cheney's energy task force. In May, when the White House unveiled its National Energy Policy, it was clear that Big Coal's message had been heard. In the plan, President Bush directed the E.P.A. and the Department of Energy to conduct a 90-day ''review'' of the impact of Clean Air Act regulations on utility-generation capacity. The report is due Aug. 17. More important, Bush asked the Department of Justice to ''review'' all those pending E.P.A. lawsuits against coal-fired power plants. (A report is expected this fall.) To environmentalists, it was a disturbing example of politics interfering with law enforcement, as well as a blatant attack on the Clean Air Act. To Big Coal, it was sweet relief. Gerard himself is definitely on the sweet-relief side. ''I think the solution here is fairly simple,'' he tells me, leaning forward in his chair. ''We need to go back to a pre-Clinton-administration interpretation of the law.'' As Gerard explains it, the Clinton administration in the mid-90's began wielding New Source Review as an ax against the coal industry. But Clinton wasn't actually the first to do so. The initial crackdown on these power-plant modifications came in 1988, under the Reagan administration. The question now is what changes, if any, the E.P.A. will recommend in the regulations on Aug. 17. Will the agency suggest that today's energy ''crisis'' can be resolved only by giving Big Coal some major concessions? Possibly. But Big Coal's dreams of turning back the clock to the ''pre-Clinton'' era were dealt a blow by the recent defection of Senator Jim Jeffords from the Republican Party. Jeffords's decision to become an independent not only threw the Senate to the Democrats but also gave him the chairmanship of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee. This powerful position allows Jeffords, an ardent supporter of clean-air regulation, to effectively block any legislation that makes life easier for dirty-power-plant operators. One measure of how much Jeffords's move has shifted the dynamic is that a mere two weeks after his announcement, eight power companies involved in New Source Review litigation announced that they had formed a lobbying group, the National Electric Reliability Coordinating Council. The group hired Haley Barbour, the former chairman of the Republican National Committee and a high-profile lobbyist, to help apply pressure in all the right places -- in particular, one assumes, the office of Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. As governor of New Jersey, Whitman was outspoken in her support of lawsuits to limit power-plant pollution; to move away from that position now won't be easy for her. ''This review is not a back-door attempt to weaken Clean Air legislation,'' she says. ''It's a serious attempt to clarify a very complex regulation.'' Whitman also points out that, while the review process is going on, the Department of Justice has not stopped enforcing the law. ''We just reached a $20 million settlement with a major refinery, so we're moving ahead.''Although New Source Review is obviously a regulatory and political battle, it's also, in some dimension, a moral battle. Many clean-air advocates believe that the utilities have been getting away with this, and other flagrant abuses of the law, for too long. ''If the administration rolls over on this, it will be a shortsighted, callous move and another example of the president's caving in to his friends in the energy industry,'' says Armand Cohen, executive director of the Clean Air Task Force, a Boston-based group. ''We're ready to kick up a firestorm.''So can Big Coal be made to behave? Gerard, for his part, has been meeting privately with environmental leaders, trying to convince them that the industry is not the Big Bad Wolf. But he tells me that a little gratitude for what Big Coal has accomplished is in order. ''What we're doing is good for the country,'' says Gerard. ''Without coal, America wouldn't be what it is today.''Getting clearance to visit Hobet 21 required considerable negotiation. I knew it was Arch's showoff mine, the place where they hold open houses for the local community. But when I called Deck Slone, a spokesman for Arch, to ask for a tour, he politely declined, saying, ''We're just too busy right now.'' Eventually Slone relented and set up a visit -- but only to the reclaimed area, not the active mining site. My visit to see reclaimed land is led by Larry Emerson, the ''environmental performance'' official, and John McDaniel, an engineer. McDaniel is tall and lanky and spookily resembles Abe Lincoln, with high cheekbones and a sly smile. McDaniel is a third-generation miner and proud of it. After a few minutes of chat at Hobet 21's bare-bones mining office, McDaniel, Emerson and I pile into McDaniel's truck. McDaniel pops a Black Sabbath disc out of the CD player so we can roll in pastoral silence across the open grassy fields. Parts of the land here are scrubby, like a reclaimed dump; older sections are more lush. We turn down a small dirt road, past small stands of black alder and Virginia pine, into a grove of young black locust trees. (Mining companies like locust trees because they suck up nitrogen, one of the problem gases released by coal-fueled power plants.) The grass here is waist high; wildflowers are blooming. A meadowlark sings from above. It's so pleasant, and so well constructed, that I half expect an animatronic deer to poke its head out of the woods.''This was all reclaimed about seven years ago,'' Emerson explains. ''As you can see, the wildlife is beginning to return. In some cases, the habitat is actually improved for many species.'' Emerson tells me that his wife is a horticulturist and that he lives on four acres of land with a pond stocked with catfish. ''I won't tell you that we're improving on what God created,'' Emerson says. ''But by opening more land, we're creating the building blocks for a growing ecosystem. We're also making this hilly terrain more suitable for commercial development.''We park on a high point overlooking a pond, and I'm getting comfortable with the view, starting to enjoy it. That's when I'm jarred by the sight, just over the ridge, of several 240-ton dump trucks grinding over the raw, dusty hills. Goodbye, eco-paradise.''Everyone thinks we just blow these mountains up,'' McDaniel says, pulling on a cigarette and leaning against the hood of his Blazer. ''But that's not really the way it works at all. It's really quite an elaborate process.'' Later, back in the mining office, McDaniel will show me intricate diagrams of the mining operation -- the way mountains are dismantled not in one blast but methodically, layer by layer. ''What I like about this work,'' says McDaniel, ''is the orchestration of all the different parts, from the permits to the rock trucks. When it all goes right, it's almost like music.'' And if a few mountains are lost along the way? ''There are lots of mountains around here,'' McDaniel responds, sweeping his hand grandly across the horizon. Of course, many nature lovers feel a bit more protective toward those peaks. Mountaintop-removal mining presents a thorny problem for a publicly held company like Arch. Stockholders demand growth and profit, but at what cost? Unlike subtler forms of environmental destruction, the results of mountaintop-removal mining are there for the whole world to see. Unless, of course, you don't let them into your mine.''We certainly feel that the effects of mountaintop mining are sometimes exaggerated,'' says Steven Leer, president and C.E.O. of Arch. In fact, Leer says, only about one-half of 1 percent of West Virginia has been mountaintop-mined. (Mountaintop-removal mining is also practiced in Kentucky and other Appalachian states, but to a lesser degree.) Local environmentalists like Cindy Rank of the West Virginia Highlands Conservancy says that the one-half of 1 percent figure may be true if you look at the entire state. But almost all of the mining goes on in the hilly southern counties, where Rank estimates that close to one-fifth of the land has been blasted away. Whatever the actual scale of these operations may be, there's no question that the environmental damage wrought on the region has been enormous. Some 470 miles of West Virginia's streams have been filled in by mountaintop mining. Thousands of families have been displaced; streams and rivers have been polluted by acid runoff. Wherever there is mining, coal companies build lakes to hold the water used to wash the coal -- the water in these lakes, called slurry ponds, is a gross, metallic mix of coal dust, mercury, sulfur, arsenic and other chemicals. In 1972, in Buffalo Creek, Ky., a poorly built dam at a slurry pond broke, sending a wall of water over the town below, killing 125 people. Last October, at a mine in Inez, Ky., operated by Massey Energy, another dam broke, dumping 250 million gallons of coal slurry into rivers and streams and killing wildlife as far as 60 miles away. Two weeks ago, unusually high runoff from mountaintop-removal mines contributed to the flooding that devastated West Virginia. Joan Mulhern, a lawyer with the Earthjustice Legal Defense Fund in Washington, argues that mountaintop-removal mining is ''a blatant violation of the Clean Water Act.'' In 1999, United States District Judge Charles H. Haden 2nd, a Republican, agreed. Responding to a lawsuit brought by environmentalists and local residents to halt a 3,100-acre expansion of Arch's Dal-Tex mine, Judge Haden's ruling essentially stopped the state from issuing new mountaintop-removal mining permits and shut down Dal-Tex. It was a stunning blow for Arch: the company laid off or transferred nearly 400 people and took a $365 million write-down. Within weeks of the ruling, Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia, long a vigorous supporter of Big Coal, tried to overturn the ruling with legislation -- only to be opposed by the Clinton administration. In April, however, the Fourth Circuit Appeals Court reversed Haden's decision. It is a complex ruling, but essentially the court decided that the Clean Water Act is superseded in West Virginia by state laws that permit the destruction of streams during mining operations. Arch is now applying for the permits to reopen Dal-Tex, while activists are pushing for the case to be reheard by the Appeals Court. Whatever the legality of mountaintop-removal mining, the idea that Arch can somehow keep its operations out of the public eye is nave. The day before I visited Hobet 21, I arranged an aerial tour of the mines with Susan Lapis, a local pilot. On a sultry summer morning, we took off from the Charleston airport in her Cessna 182, climbing through the gray-yellow haze that often makes the air around Charleston look like L.A. on a bad day. At about 3,000 feet, the mountains looked like a soft, undulating green carpet below. About 15 minutes outside of the city, rips in that carpet suddenly appeared -- wide-open bald spots where raw earth was exposed. I could see the deep cuts in the earth and the thick horizontal seams of raw coal. As we headed farther into Big Coal country, the rips and bald spots in the land became larger and more frequent. Some mountains looked as if they had been sliced off with a machete. Others were so deeply mined they looked like miniature Grand Canyons. We flew south for more than an hour, passing dozens of mines, some active, some inactive, all naked and raw. Sandwiched between the bright pink flesh of exposed mountains were enormous slurry ponds of metallic green and gold. Whenever I looked out at the horizon, there were more mines in the distance. Eventually, we circled down to 500 feet above Hobet 21. It was enormous and busy. Giant dump trucks filled with rock scurried around, while huge scooping machines ripped out tons of earth. In Silicon Valley, it is commonplace to talk about technology empowering individuals. Here was empowerment on a colossal scale -- one man with the right machine could destroy a mountain. When Bill Raney, the head of the West Virginia Coal Association, walks into a bar in Charleston on a recent evening, the whole place lights up: ''Hey, Bill!'' Raney is slim and folksy, with a thick drawl that clashes with his well-tailored blue suit. He has a kind word or a joke for everyone in the room. When the waitress arrives with his Coors Light, she stares at him and says, ''You look familiar.'' Raney winks and drawls, ''A face this ugly is kinda hard to forget, ain't it?''The day before, a front-page story had appeared in The Wall Street Journal detailing how Raney, along with a local coal baron, James H. Harless, had helped engineer President Bush's electoral victory in West Virginia last November. The five electoral votes of this longtime Democratic state gave Bush the slim edge he needed to win the presidency. The piece chronicled the grass-roots organizing Raney did on Bush's behalf, as well as noting that, nationwide, Big Coal donated $3.8 million for the 2000 election, tripling its 1996 contributions. Almost all of that money went to Republicans. Over his beer, Raney says he was ''embarrassed'' by the story and chuckles at the idea that he was the kingmaker in the election. ''I just fought for what I believe in, like I always do,'' he says. Still, when Raney talks about last year's election, there's a mix of triumph and relief in his eyes. ''We really worked hard on that,'' Raney says, speaking for his association, which includes 78 mining-related companies in West Virginia. ''We had a lot at stake.''Indeed they did. In West Virginia, the immediate fear was that a Gore administration would find a way to crack down on mountaintop-removal mining. But more broadly, it was the looming threat of carbon-dioxide regulations that fired up Big Coal to support Bush. Gore, after all, had written an entire book about the danger of global warming. And there's nothing that freezes the heart of a coal-company executive like frank talk about greenhouse gases. Cars and coal-fired power plants are the two biggest emitters of carbon dioxide and other gases that are warming the climate. But when the carbon whip comes down, everyone knows whom they'll go after first. ''We're walking around with a big bull's-eye on our foreheads,'' jokes James Rogers, C.E.O. of Cinergy, a Midwestern coal-burning utility. Twenty miles west of Charleston is the John Amos power plant. Squatting on the banks of the Kanawha River, this plant run by American Electric Power consumes up to 26,000 tons of coal a day and generates enough electricity to light two million homes. Inside the plant, a huge iron-encased turbine spins in a huge, echoing room as big as a church. Ninety-six pipes feed pulverized coal dust into a burner at tremendous pressure, where it heats the water that produces steam that spins the turbine that produces the electricity. Flowing from the tops of the plant's three enormous cooling towers is what appears to be a cloud of pollution. It is not. It's just water vapor; the E.P.A. strictly regulates visible emissions. But though all but imperceptible, plenty of pollution spews daily from the plant's three slender 900-foot smokestacks. The largest polluter in West Virginia, John Amos in 1999 dumped 98,000 tons of sulfur dioxide; 47,500 tons of nitrogen oxides; and 838 pounds of mercury, just a tiny amount of which in a lake make the fish unfit for human consumption. But the real whopper is the amount of carbon dioxide: 16 million tons of it. This is the Achilles' heel of Big Coal. With respect to the pollutants that cause smog and acid rain, modern coal-powered plants can compare favorably with gas-powered plants. But even the newest, most efficient conventional coal plant emits three times as much carbon dioxide as a natural gas plant. And old, less efficient coal plants burn considerably more CO2. For a utility executive, building a new power plant means thinking 60 years down the road -- the life expectancy of a new plant. It's also a billion-dollar investment that could be rendered obsolete virtually overnight by a global crackdown on carbon dioxide. As Manoj Guha, a technology manager at American Electric, puts it, ''You'd have to be crazy to build a conventional coal-fired power plant right now.''There are ways to deal with carbon dioxide from power plants. The easiest remedy is creating ''carbon sinks'' -- that is, the planting of thousands of trees, which suck up carbon dioxide. And although it's great P.R. for the power companies (there are so many parrot and jungle scenes in American Electric's corporate literature that you'd think the company was headquartered on the banks of the Amazon, not in Ohio), carbon sinks have a limited usefulness. In 1999, the United States released about 5.5 billion tons of carbon dioxide from all sources; you'd need a forest the size of Jupiter to absorb all that. Another option is more high-tech. Instead of burning coal, a chemical process can be used that transforms it into a gas, which can then be burned. Removing much of the carbon dioxide during this process is a fairly simple job. The downside of gasification, as this process is called, is that it is relatively untested for power generation; there are only two such plants up and running in the U.S. Of greater concern to Big Coal, however, is the fact that they're rather more expensive to build than conventional coal plants. And it still leaves you with the problem of what to do with the carbon dioxide once you remove it from the coal. On July 13, the Bush administration took a small step forward by announcing several partnerships with private industry to develop new technologies for ''carbon sequestration'' -- capturing and storing emissions underground or at the bottom of the ocean. For years, executives in the power industry had a ''hear no evil, see no evil'' response to any mention of carbon dioxide. Recently, that has started to change. Progressive leaders in the industry, like Jim Rogers at Cinergy, were tiring of what he calls ''environmental policy through litigation.'' Last year, Rogers and others began back-room talks with various leaders in the environmental movement to see if a long-range regulatory agreement could be hammered out. In exchange for some kind of broad relief from the current death-by-a-thousand-blows style of environmental regulation, Rogers and others were willing to cross the Rubicon and acknowledge that carbon-dioxide emissions need to drop significantly. But the powerful hard-line faction of Big Coal, which is led by the Southern Company, the country's biggest utility, and Peabody Energy, the world's big-gest coal-mining company, would rather go back to rubbing sticks together than embrace pollution controls. The hard-liners want to keep pumping the plants as they have done for decades; to them, caving in on carbon dioxide is unthinkable.''These guys aren't dumb,'' says Dale Simbeck, an executive at SFA Pacific, an energy consulting firm. ''In a carbon-constrained world, coal is a clear loser.'' Of course, even hard-liners publicly pledge their commitment to various clean-coal technologies. But they always insist that such changes can only be made decades down the road, Simbeck says. ''The auto industry uses the same strategy,'' he explains. ''It's always heralding some magnificent breakthrough just over the horizon, while it fights like hell to keep doing business as usual in the here and now.''No one embodies this no-compromise philosophy better than Irl Engelhardt, chairman and C.E.O. of Peabody Energy, which is headquartered in St. Louis. Engelhardt, 54, keeps a low public profile. (He refused to be interviewed for this story.) He is a brilliant financial strategist, having successfully guided Peabody through a heavily leveraged buyout a few years ago. Last year, he set his sights on taking Peabody public. This meant, among other things, that as the 2000 election took shape, Engelhardt had a huge stake in ensuring that the future of Big Coal looked rosy. And nothing clouds that picture faster than talk about global climate change. Although Peabody's corporate literature is full of talk about the company's environmental sensitivity, behind closed doors, Engelhardt himself is decidedly less progressive. In March, during a meeting on Capitol Hill with Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, a strong advocate of tougher regulations on power-plant emissions, Engelhardt told the senator, according to several attendees: ''Climate change is just an environmentalist's P.R. tool. There's no science to back that up.'' (Through a spokesman, Engelhardt said he ''believes that current climate-change science is uncertain.'') Of particular concern to Engelhardt was the Kyoto treaty, which would have capped carbon dioxide emissions at pre-1990 levels. During a speech last July at the Edison Electric Institute, the utility industry's lobbying association, Engelhardt used classic Big Coal scare tactics, telling the group that adhering to the Kyoto treaty would require the country to build 68 new nuclear power plants by 2020 and boost wind power by 22 times today's output. And the coal industry, Engelhardt implied, would be out of business. To shape the debate, Engelhardt was not afraid to put his money where his mouth was. Peabody donated $250,000 to the Republican National Committee during 1999-2000, and Engelhardt himself gave $100,000 to the Bush-Cheney inaugural fund. During the same cycle, Steve Chancellor, the head of Black Beauty Coal, an affiliate that is 82 percent owned by Peabody, gave $344,750 to Republicans. If you add it all up, Peabody, Engelhardt and Engelhardt's business associates donated close to $700,000 to President Bush and his party last year. Not surprisingly, Bush named Engelhardt to the transition advisory team for the E.P.A.; for a while, his name was in the running for secretary of energy, a position that eventually went to former Senator Spencer Abraham of Michigan. Another Peabody executive, John Wootten, served on the transition advisory team for energy. In mid-March, when Bush abandoned his support of carbon-dioxide regulations, many saw Engelhardt's fingerprints all over the decision: ''I think you could say Engelhardt got what he paid for,'' says the C.E.O. of a major power company. But that doesn't mean that Big Coal has won the battle. ''The pressures to do something about CO2 emissions are just enormous,'' says Kris Krause, a senior executive at Wisconsin Energy. And they are about to get bigger. Senator Jeffords has made clear to staff members that he will make power-plant emissions legislation his No. 1 priority this fall. There is a rising sense that, whatever the complexities of the science of climate change may be, America can no longer afford to stick its head in the sand. Even Senator Byrd and Senator John McCain, neither of whom is any great friend of the environmental movement, have suggested that it is time to start thinking about a carbon-capped future. It will be a long, hard fight. By all accounts, the White House was caught off-guard by the uproar that followed the president's reversal on carbon dioxide. (The morning of the announcement, one senior administration official crowed to Rusty Matthews, an energy lobbyist, that it would be ''a one-day story.'') But contrary to what you might guess from the White House's flat-footedness on this, there are senior staff members in the administration who take climate change seriously and believe we cannot wait another four years to do something about it. However, these same staff members are trapped in a box. Any movement by Bush toward a carbon-capped world will anger Big Coal supporters in states like Ohio, West Virginia and Illinois, all of which were crucial to his election victory; any movement away from carbon caps will further underscore the growing public perception that the president is out of touch on environmental issues and could cause trouble for Republicans in next year's midterm elections. So could New Source Review. Christie Whitman has been adamant that this be seen as an open process and points out that, in addition to four public hearings around the country, her staff has consulted with more than 96 organizations. But all this public exposure has only heightened awareness of the issue, turning it into a litmus test of the administration's environmental commitment and continuing the debate over whether Bush is in the energy industry's pocket. However it plays out, there has already been one clear winner in the fossil-fuel sweepstakes: Irl Engelhardt and Peabody Energy. In mid-February, while Bush's energy task force was still formulating its policy, Peabody Energy filed with the S.E.C. for an initial public stock offering. On May 22, just five days after the energy plan was released, Peabody went public. Tech stocks were tanking, but Peabody defied gravity, opening at $28 and shooting up to close at the end of the day at $36. Engelhardt's personal stake of more than 633,000 shares was worth more than $23 million. After leaving Hobet 21, hoping to get a look at the operation from a different perspective, I take a drive into the mountains that surround the mine. I was told that there is a spot between the towns of Big Muddy and Ugly where you can get a close look at the pit. I drive an hour or so, passing disassembled 4 by 4's up on jacks, rusting mobile homes and small but beautifully tended gardens flowering in rare patches of sunlight. At one point, hopelessly lost, I stop to talk to a pimply kid on a muddy Honda ATV parked beside the road. I ask him if he knows where I can get a look at Arch's big mine. Without saying a word, he nods, starts his ATV and heads up the road. I follow. He turns onto a dirt road, and we come to a small clearing -- there, a thousand yards or so in the distance, is the open pit. There are trails down the hill, and I can hear the buzz of other ATV's along with the grinding of the dragline and the high-pitched whine of dump trucks struggling up a grade.''You ride down there?'' I ask the boy, whose name was Robby.''Yeah. It's killer.''''They don't chase you off?''''Nah. They know we're just havin' fun.''I nod. ''Anyone in your family work there?''''I wish,'' he says. ''Good money. These guys, they all have new boats.''I thank Robby for showing me the spot; he slips on his helmet and rides off down the hill. A few minutes later, I see him on a far hill in the mine, not far from where Emerson and McDaniel and I stood earlier, tearing up and down the hillside with several friends. Add kids with ATV's to the list of creatures who thrive in reclaimed mine habitat. Earlier, McDaniel scoffed at me when I asked if coal companies deliberately site mines in places that are hidden from public view -- we mine where the coal is,'' he said. Still, there is something secretive about all this and about energy production in general. We'd all like to imagine that the wired world just spins on its own, that electricity comes out of the wall, that none of this aging and immense and complex machinery -- the dump trucks and railroad cars and power plants -- really exists. And because we have such great faith in technology, we want to believe that coal can somehow be made perfectly clean, that nuclear power can be made completely safe, that wind farms can stop mutilating birds, that gas can be extracted from the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in, as the White House often puts it, ''an environmentally sound manner.'' But producing energy is simply not a zero-sum game -- at least, not yet. There is always risk and loss; there are always unintended consequences. Indeed, this is why mountaintop-removal mining is so controversial. Greenhouse gases are tough to see, but you can't miss a carved-up mountain: it makes explicit the trade-off we make to keep our wired world humming. It is the energy equivalent of witnessing the slaughter of the cow that goes into our hamburger. Despite its many troubling aspects, coal is likely to remain a big part of the energy mix in America for a long time to come. Hydrogen-powered fuel cells are fun to dream about, but in the real world, coal's plentiful reserves, as well as the entrenched infrastructure -- mines, railroads, power plants -- mean we aren't going to get off this black rock anytime soon. The question is, how much damage must be done to the mountains, to the air, to the water, to our lungs, to the planet? Big Coal can either join Big Tobacco on the periphery of American life, an isolated empire of denial and abuse, or it can start listening to its own polished rhetoric about its cleaning up its act. Granted, embracing pollution controls or mining coal in ecologically sensitive ways is not cheap. But it all depends on how you calculate the price. For now, the boom continues. I stand on the hilltop for a few more minutes and watch the dragline. The big scooper tears into the earth, lifts 100 tons of dirt away and dumps it in another pile, with no more apparent effort than it takes my 3-year-old son to shovel sand on the beach. The dragline works with an incessant rhythm -- digging, lifting, dumping, digging, lifting, dumping -- and it is going on here at Hobet 21, and at mines all over the country, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. As McDaniel explained to me a few hours earlier, ''It costs too much to stop.''Jeff Goodell is the author of ''Sunnyvale: The Rise and Fall of a Silicon Valley Family.'' He last wrote for the magazine about the execution of Timothy McVeigh. Correction:  August 12, 2001, Sunday  An article on July 22 about the revival of the coal industry misstated the location of a dam that burst in 1972, killing 125 people. The dam, which accumulated water that was used to wash coal, was on Buffalo Creek in West Virginia. There is no such town as Buffalo Creek, Ky. Correction: August 12, 2001, SundayAn article on July 22 about the revival of the coal industry misstated the location of a dam that burst in 1972, killing 125 people. The dam, which accumulated water that was used to wash coal, was on Buffalo Creek in West Virginia. There is no such town as Buffalo Creek, Ky.

GEOPOLITICS needn't be mind-bending. Think of a centuries-long floating poker game in which the lead keeps changing hands, from Greece to Rome, Spain to Britain, France to Prussia. These days, one player not only holds the chips and a stack of i. o. u.'s; he has most of his rivals' clothes, too. Now imagine that he wants to change the rules -- a necessity, he insists, to keep things fair for everyone. What do you do? If you are Russia, a nation clearly stripped to its geopolitical skivvies, you play your China card. Which is what President Vladimir V. Putin did last week, signing a friendship treaty with Beijing that mandates increased trade, peaceful borders and -- pointedly -- arm-in-arm opposition to any attempt to rig the Great Game. In fact, Russia, China and, perhaps, a few European allies are starting to wonder if the United States wants to do just that. Americans like to think of themselves as people who spurn empire -- benevolent rulers who bestride the globe not by force but, darn it all, by popular demand. There is some truth in that: to an amazing extent, what is good for America has been good for the world. Europe and Japan could hardly have been so prosperous and democratic without America, and both still turn to Washington for direction and security. Had not George W. Bush's father rallied the world in 1990, Iraq might today have a stranglehold on its oil. Russians owe their liberty to American resolve. And Bill Clinton even invited the Kosovo war's chief critic, Russia, into the force patrolling Kosovo after NATO won. The question now is whether that happy confluence of American and global interests -- the linchpin, in some ways, of its status as earth's first hyperpower -- can continue. And at the core of that question, ironically enough, is the emerging foreign policy of President Bush -- a policy reflected in his encounters with foreign leaders at the industrialized-nation summit these last few days, and in the reportedly successful test of a missile defense component a week ago. It is still early. But the global consensus-building of Mr. Bush's predecessors so far has been muscled aside by a more barehanded pursuit of American interests. The new White House has all but scrapped the granddaddy of arms-control agreements, the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, as it pursues a missile defense, and it has revoked approval of the Kyoto pact to slow global warming. Mr. Bush is endorsing plans to push NATO membership to the Russian border over Moscow's objections. The Pentagon is mulling a grand strategy shift that would curtail its global military presence -- a comfort to European and Asian allies. Today's wars, the theory goes, can be waged from afar with missiles and bombers. Most of these moves involve tossing out longstanding rules -- about the balance of nuclear terror, the sanctity of treaties and so forth. The resulting outcry has become so pronounced that Mr. Bush was prompted last week to publicly deny Democratic charges that he is an isolationist. In fact, the administration is not isolationist. Unilateralist, perhaps. That term traces a thread of conservative thought that argues that the United States must seize its moment of dominance not just to secure its vital interests, but to make democracy and capitalism the permanent global order. Whatever the logic of that philosophy, it is unquestionably making old friends feel queasy and new ones impotent. The Russians are a case in point: Under Mr. Putin, the focus of Kremlin foreign policy has shifted from alliance with America toward a strategic relationship with China and an all-out courting of Europe. And Europeans have reason to feel uneasy: Germany in particular has invested a lot in trying to bring Russia into the Western economic fold, and none of them can want to return to the old days of having to choose between Washington's and Moscow's views of nuclear and alliance policies. At the summit in Genoa, the European leaders could see the resentment aroused by globalization -- which is, for many of their constituents, just a shorthand for a new world order dominated by Americans. They know the resentment resonates in their own politics. Mr. Putin, who once worked for the K.G.B. in Europe, knows it too. So it may be useful to listen when Aleksandr Dugin, a decidedly nationalist intellectual who has founded a fashionable new Russian party and has the ears of both the Kremlin and the the Communists, says: ''We see American intentions from a completely different angle than you. We see the United States as trying to organize a new colonial process, a new world domination and the one form of world government dominated by American interests.''Moscow's new friendship treaty with China, the first since the 1950's, is one means of reply. On paper, the pact amounts to little more than a blueprint for trade relations and a symbolic declaration that the two nations do not want their voice in world affairs drowned out by America. Mr. Putin himself marked its limits days after signing it, telling reporters that while Moscow and Beijing may both strenuously oppose scrapping the Antiballistic Missile Treaty, there will be no joint reaction should that occur. But American experts say the agreement should not be discounted.''For American foreign policy,'' said Michael Mandelbaum, a foreign-policy expert at Johns Hopkins University in Washington, it is ''what high blood pressure is to a heart attack: It's a warning sign. And it says that if you persist in these habits, there's going to be trouble.'' Indeed, Russia has already frustrated American efforts in the United Nations to construct a new set of sanctions against Iraq. In addition, Mr. Mandelbaum says, ''The Europeans care a lot about what the Russians think, because they share a continent with them, and they share some of the same reservations.''In the minds of skeptics, East and West alike, here are the makings of a rent in the international security structure that the West fought a 50-year cold war to build. In poker terms, the new world order only works if Russia and China, long ostracized, can be persuaded to play by the rules and hold a real stake in the game. That means giving Russia a geopolitical anchor -- economic and perhaps even political ties to Europe, most experts think -- instead of allowing it to revert to its historic role as a suspicious loner bent on surrounding itself with a buffer zone of satellite states. THE skeptics say American unilateralism does just the opposite at a crucial moment. America and Russia ''no longer view one another as enemies,'' says Alexei Arbatov, a military expert for the Russian parliament, but they are not yet allies, and building a consensus  -- with, say, a military treaty between Russia and NATO -- could lead to a genuine alliance. But ''the reverse is also true,'' he said. ''Early rejection of treaties and accords may escalate a lack of security, breed mutual suspicions, and return the states to the phase of dtente and hostility.''There is another side to this debate, of course, and it goes: However much the Russians, Chinese and Europeans may dislike American unilateralism, they will tolerate it. The cost of tugging too hard on Superman's cape is simply too steep. It is no secret, for example, why the alliance between China and Russia is mostly words and not action: the $120 billion a year in Chinese-American trade is 12 to 15 times the total between America and Moscow. Moreover, even some Russians argue that the Bush administration's no-nonsense approach to power has its benefits. Boris N. Yeltsin's first foreign minister, Andrei Kozyrev, says the Clinton White House maintained the fiction that Russia was an equal partner too long. Mr. Yeltsin, he said, never got over the shock of realizing too late that ''Friend Bill'' truly would expand NATO into the old Warsaw Pact.''Let's take measures before things get out of hand, before there is humiliation,'' he  said. ''Just clearly tell the people that yes, we are going for this missile-defense research, we are going with NATO expansion. I think Putin is young and clever and strong enough to handle straight talk.''And if not? Sergei Rogov, the director of Moscow's U.S.A. and Canada Studies Institute, posits what he calls the ''sad scenario'' in 2002. First, he says, comes an open American breach of the ABM Treaty, followed by a decision to grant NATO membership to the Baltic states. The last straw is a drop in oil prices, robbing Russia of its ability to pay its huge Western debt. Mr. Rogov said at a seminar last month that he doubted all three would happen, but if they did, Russia's option would be clear: ''I remember,'' he said, ''that in my remote childhood, we used to sing 'Russian and Chinese are Brothers for Centuries.' ''American Way

INTERNATIONAL3-14Day 2 of Genoa Meeting: Policy and Protests  The United States' leading allies told President Bush that they intended to move ahead and ratify the Kyoto Protocol on global warming by next year, even without American participation. Tens of thousands of demonstrators marched toward the city's center, occasionally skirmishing with a watchful police force that took a lower profile on the streets as they struggled to control surging crowds.1Negotiators from 178 countries moved a step closer to agreement on the final details of the Kyoto Protocol, a climate treaty rejected by Mr. Bush. The agreement would be the first to require industrialized countries to cut emissions of heat-trapping gases.14Pressures on Mexico Farmers  Peasants are taking to the streets to protest the forces they say undermine their way of life -- from the explosion of free trade under Nafta to plummeting market prices and cuts in government support -- pushing the agricultural industry to the point of civil unrest.1Move to Oust Indonesia Leader  Indonesia's legislature demanded by a unanimous vote that President Abdurrahman Wahid defend himself on Monday in what is called an accountability speech, as part of the process to remove him from office. He condemned the move as unconstitutional and treasonous.4Hong Kong Ruling Irks China  The Chinese government said it disapproved of a ruling by Hong Kong's highest court that granted residency to a 3-year-old boy born in the territory to a mainland Chinese mother and that rebuffed the government's request to consult Beijing before handing down the ruling.8NATIONAL16-24Soaring Cost of Drugs Chips at Plan for Elderly  Lawmakers are struggling to deliver a prescription drug benefit for the nation's elderly. But even the most generous benefits now under consideration will probably fall far short of what the elderly expect. This gap in expectations is a result of the soaring costs of prescription drugs and the limited amount of federal money set aside to pay for them.1Gas Production Lagging  Despite an increase in new drilling, the nation's gas production is only barely creeping up, and not nearly enough to meet the rising demand.1Where Are the Golfers?  Even as baby boomers reach their 50's they are not turning up on the golf courses -- a trend that worries the industry.1Mixed Success in Bay Cleanup  Signs of progress abound in the decades-long cleanup of the Chesapeake Bay. But the effort is falling short of some of its goals.16Progress on Train Fire  Firefighters in Baltimore made headway in ending the disruption caused by a freight train that derailed in a tunnel while carrying hazardous chemicals.16Dispute Over Ads  A $12 million award against a Hooters restaurant after it sent unsolicited faxes represents a growing movement to curtail such advertising.18Logging Plan Faulted  The Forest Service is considering letting loggers harvest as many as 73,000 acres of blackened trees left standing after fires in Montana. Environmental groups are critical of the plan.23NEW YORK/REGION27-33Consulting Firm Office Is a Campaign Headquarters  The Madison Avenue office of Morris, Carrick & Guma, a political consulting firm, has become nothing less than the headquarters of the mayoral campaign of Alan G. Hevesi, the city comptroller who is the close friend and high-profile client of the firm's partner Hank Morris.27A Chinatown Within Chinatown  Since immigrants from Fujian Province in China began flooding into the United States, they have built a vibrant refuge for themselves in a grimy corner of Lower Manhattan. Every Monday, the day of rest for Chinese restaurants, Fujianese immigrants from around the country converge there, the one place in their fragmented American universe where everyone speaks their dialect and businesses cater to their needs.1Fresh Air Fund33OBITUARIES34Beate Uhse  The developer of Europe's largest emporium of erotic goods was 81.34Chess33  Sunday Q & A24  Cong. Vote30  Weather35

As tens of thousands of demonstrators marched toward the center of this ancient city and occasionally clashed with the police, the United States' leading allies told President Bush today that they intended to move ahead and ratify the Kyoto Protocol on global warming by next year, even without American participation. At the summit meeting of top industrial nations, protesters and riot police clashed anew, one day after a protester was killed. Today as many as 50,000 demonstrators flowed through the streets of Genoa, but outside the center of the city, where the leaders were sequestered. The crowds were far larger than on Friday. The police made efforts to keep their distance, after images raced around the world on Friday of an Italian policeman shooting a demonstrator dead, and then running over his body with a jeep. In the day's meeting agenda,  Prime Minister Jean Chrtien of Canada said that his nation had the  same position on the global warming treaty ''as Japan, as Europe, as Russia: we are ready to ratify.''Other officials suggested that a round of telephone calls among the leaders of Japan, France and Germany this week had left Mr. Bush isolated on the issue. Mr. Chrtien said negotiators would work overnight to come up with some common language about global warming for a communiqu to be issued Sunday. But he added that negotiators in Bonn, where a meeting on the subject is under way, would work on details of how the Kyoto accord would be implemented. [Those negotiators moved a step closer to agreement on the final details. Page 14. ] Without American participation, though, the treaty would be largely ineffective. Mr. Chrtien said the Americans had agreed to come up with an alternative proposal to Kyoto, but the Americans said they had not promised a date for delivering that plan. In the debate on global warming, Mr. Chrtien said Mr. Bush had promised to present an alternative to the specific restrictions of the Kyoto agreement by early fall, a proposal that would presumably sidestep the Kyoto accord's specific targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions to levels Mr. Bush said would cripple the American economy. Mr. Chrtien said he was still open to hearing the American proposal, but he was not waiting for it. ''They claim they will be ready,'' he told reporters this afternoon. ''I will see.''As the leaders politely dealt with their disagreements, the global warming issue did not come up in  meetings Mr. Bush held today with President Chirac and Chancellor Gerhard Schrder of Germany. Twenty-four hours after the death of the protester, Mr. Bush spoke about it briefly today, saying, ''It's a tragic loss of life.'' But he insisted that protesters who ''claim to represent the voices of the poor aren't doing so. Those protesters who try to shut down our talks on trade and aid don't represent the poor, as far as I'm concerned.''But while Mr. Bush insisted that the leaders should be undeterred by escalating protests at these summit meetings, President Jacques Chirac of France, sitting next to him, offered a different view. ''Obviously, we have all been traumatized by the events,'' he said. Mr. Chirac, referring to the protests, said: ''The elected leaders of our countries have to consider the problems that have brought tens of thousands of our compatriots, mainly from European countries, to demonstrate their concern, to demonstrate their wish to change.''As sporadic scuffles with the police continued into the evening, Mr. Bush and his fellow leaders dined by the port of this ancient city, in an ornate, early 19th-century boat terminal that has been restored, along with much of this city. Even that imagery worried some leaders, who knew that the television images of their toasts would be intermingled with the scenes of rock throwing and tear gassing a mile away.''We have to find another way,'' a senior Japanese diplomat said late today. ''This is no way to hold a real discussion.''The police, bedecked in an array of riot dress and armed with tear gas and more lethal weaponry, tried to take a lower profile on the streets today as they struggled to contain the largest crowds yet. They were absent entirely from the site of the  shooting of the protester, even when a group of young anarchists attacked a Japanese television journalist. The protesters who turned out on the broad boulevards here were composed of young veterans of the Friday clashes, some with bandaged wounds, union members, smartly dressed groups of citizens from towns all over Europe bearing banners with anti-capitalist slogans in different languages, and black-clad anarchists. Many of the self-described ''Black Bloc'' wore motorcycle helmets and waved lengths of lumber as truncheons. The tension ran high between moderate groups who saw the gathering here of leaders from the leading industrial nations as a chance to protest against disparities between the rich and poor, and the anarchists who wanted to act out their rage after the shooting death of one of their supporters. The plaza where that shooting took place, in front of a large Baroque church, was converted into an informal shrine today, with mounds of flowers and candles, and messages scribbled on paper and T-shirts. ''May you have not departed for nothing,'' said one. A little more than a mile away, President Bush and the other leaders of the Group of 8 nations held an all-morning review of security challenges in Europe and Asia, before signing a guest book of notables who have come to the home port of Christopher Columbus. On Sunday, after the formal meetings have concluded, President Bush is to meet with Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, in a session that will conclude with a joint news conference here. The meeting will be their second face-to-face session and they are expected to discuss the Bush administration's plan to pursue a broad missile defense program that will violate the Antiballistic Missile Treaty that the Russians want to preserve. But for today, the leaders focused on their anti-poverty agenda, mindful of the rocky situation outside. ''It is vitally important that democratically elected leaders legitimately representing millions of people can meet to discuss areas of common concern,'' the group said in a statement. The leaders said they would focus on issues ''that matter most to our people,'' including economy, trade, job creation and, this year more than others, methods for sparking greater productivity in the poorest nations. But in private, several of Mr. Bush's aides conceded that the imagery of the leaders meeting in the splendor of a 13th century medieval palace, while smoke and tear gas wafted over the hills nearby, seemed only to highlight the gulf between the leaders and the protesters. The security cordon was so tight that a 15-foot fence around the central city, which demonstrators threatened without success on Friday to breach, was later reinforced.  Military units at the airport kept antimissile batteries, which had been installed earlier, at the ready because of fears of a terrorist attack. The causes represented on the street today included environmental groups like the World Wildlife Fund, Roman Catholic social workers pushing an anti-poverty agenda, pacifists and myriad national groups calling for the liberation of Iran, the liberation of the Kurds in Iraq and greater democracy in Turkey. Labor unionists were in abundance, and signs read ''People before profit'' and ''Stop the capitalist-profit circus.''But the mix of moderate protesters and determined troublemakers served to dilute many of the messages. Some of the moderates clearly held back today, afraid for their physical safety and wary of an association with violent demonstrators whose tactics they say they abhor. Among them was Luciano Battagli, a 60-year-old retired schoolteacher and regional union leader from Italy. ''I myself am not against globalization,'' Mr. Battagli said. ''But I don't like the bosses dictating to the world. The money they spent to do this summit, the ostentatious display of wealth and power, is a shame. They are spending more to do the summit than they are ever going to do for Africa.''Nearby, members of the Black Bloc, helmeted and bearing gardening tools and clearly itching for a fight, carried a banner declaring ''Stop G-8'' and shouted ''bastard'' and ''assassino'' at the police. A young Welsh protester named Robert, 50, wearing plaid shorts and a yellow T-shirt that said ''Drop the Debt,'' identifying himself as a member of a group calling for more aggressive debt relief for the poorest nations, walked in the march today along the sea coast until clouds of tear gas ahead drove him back. He explained that Drop the Debt organizers had warned members who had been planning to participate in the march about safety concerns after the killing on Friday night. Many chose to hold an ecumenical prayer vigil on a church near the march route instead.''There is a lot of anguish about the death of that young boy,'' he said. Robin Fishwick from Leeds, England, who traveled here on a bus with his wife Sarah, said the chaos of the crowds and the violence has made it ''very difficult'' to relay their message. ''We act peacefully, we get many people together, but they don't make news'' because their members do not create trouble.''Trouble makes the news, but then they don't talk about what we came here for,'' he said. Rather than marching today, he and other Drop the Debt participants held a vigil and teach-in about the debt problem along the route of the march. Mr. Bush has countered the protesters by insisting that ever freer trade is the answer to the problems facing developing nations, though never once here has he explored the side effects on countries unable to compete with the richest nations.''Our discussions here in Europe are centered on some great goals,'' Mr. Bush said in a radio address broadcast this morning. ''We want to spread the benefits of free trade as far and as wide as possible. Free trade is the only proven path out of poverty for developing nations. And when nations are shut off from the world, their people pay a steep price.''The developing countries have no need for protectionist policies that would condemn them to permanent poverty,'' Mr. Bush said. GENOA SUMMIT MEETING: THE OVERVIEW

In Bonn, Germany, negotiators from 178 countries huddled in a last-ditch effort to complete the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty that would require cuts in gases linked to global warming. The United States, the largest source of warming gases, sent 34 officials. But in the wake of President Bush's rejection of the treaty or any binding reductions, they had strict orders not to offer new ideas. Few participants thought there would be a significant breakthrough in the talks, set to end today. Andrew C. Revkin

President Bush spent a busy weekend meeting with seven other world leaders in Genoa, Italy, with mixed resultsPresident Bush spent a busy weekend meeting with seven other world leaders in Genoa, Italy, with mixed results. His session with President Vladimir Putin of Russia brought a promising agreement to coordinate discussions on reducing offensive nuclear weapons and building a limited missile defense. But Mr. Bush's stubborn resistance to international plans to reduce global warming further isolated the United States from most of its leading allies. The plan for broad arms talks with Russia, to be fleshed out this week in Moscow by the White House national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, is consistent with Mr. Bush's idea of shifting nuclear  thinking to a new, post-cold-war framework. But it marks a welcome step away from his administration's earlier view that Washington might simply proceed with its own plans on offensive and defensive weapons and let Moscow react as it wished. Missile defenses have not yet been proven technologically feasible. Should that happen, building them without amending or replacing the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty would face fierce opposition from European allies and Congressional Democrats and could set off a new arms race  with Russia and China, undermining America's security rather than strengthening it. Linking  discussions on offensive and defensive weapons makes sense. Russia, with its economy strained and its existing missile force increasingly difficult to maintain, has long favored deep offensive cuts.  Mr. Bush also wants sharp reductions in America's nuclear arsenal. Agreement on cutting warheads might win Russian assent to modify the ABM treaty to permit development of a limited missile shield. On global warming, yesterday's joint communiqu fudged over the issue in the absence of a clear consensus. European leaders, including Mr. Putin, reaffirmed their intentions of abiding by the Kyoto Protocol. But Washington refuses to join them, citing the potential drag on future American economic growth. That is shortsighted. At the Genoa meetings, France's president, Jacques Chirac, and Germany's chancellor, Gerhard Schrder, were clearly frustrated by Mr. Bush's unreasonable withdrawal from the Kyoto agreement and his vague promises about producing new American proposals. Genoa also produced new commitments to address the economic and health problems of poorer nations, including an initial $1.3 billion contribution to a worldwide fund to combat H.I.V./AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. The leaders endorsed expanded debt relief and reduced barriers to imports from developing countries and backed a new global round of trade liberalization talks. The attention to environmental issues and poverty reflected the concerns of many of those who demonstrated peacefully in Genoa. Most protesters were nonviolent. But the deliberate provocations of a small number of anarchists and the harsh reaction of Italian security forces brought tragedy, leaving more than 100 seriously injured and one demonstrator shot dead. In planning future meetings, Mr. Bush and his fellow leaders need to steer a course between isolated, bunkerlike gatherings in remote areas and meetings in congested cities like Genoa that lend themselves to violent street demonstrations.

President Bush and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia agreed to link discussions of missile defense with large cuts in nuclear arsenals. President Bush and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia agreed today to link  discussions of American plans to deploy a missile defense system with the prospect of large cuts in both nuclear arsenals. If an accord was reached quickly, it might take the place of the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. Mr. Putin's willingness to enter into simultaneous talks on both offensive and defensive weapons, which American officials said was a surprise, was greeted enthusiastically by Mr. Bush. He had proposed both the offensive and defensive changes during his presidential campaign.''I believe that we will come up with an accord,'' Mr. Bush, looking almost ebullient, said at a news conference this afternoon, after the two leaders met for two hours in a 15th-century palace and after the Group of 8 summit meeting closed. When Mr. Putin was asked what would happen if the United States went ahead with tests that violated the ABM treaty, his answer seemed starkly different from the stand he took last month in Moscow, when he had warned that any violation could touch off a renewed arms race.''If, as we understood from each other today, we are ready to look at the issue of offensive and defensive systems together as a set, we might not ever need to look at that option,'' Mr. Putin said. [Excerpts, Page A8. ]For all the smiles and warm embraces today between Mr. Bush and Mr. Putin, who met for the first time last month in Slovenia, all that was agreed upon today was to start a series of intensive ''consultations.''  Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser and a Russia expert, said tonight that the consultations -- which she carefully did not refer to as negotiations -- would take place on ''an aggressive schedule,'' which she would work out on a visit to Moscow this week. But in the past, Ms. Rice has expressed considerable skepticism about the arms control process that dragged on through the cold war, and she has made clear in recent days that she is not looking to replace the ABM treaty with another formal treaty, subject to Senate approval.  ''What we are not interested in doing is replicating the old arms control process where it takes 15 years to come to an agreement,'' she said tonight. Speaking to a small group of reporters, she also sounded more cautious than did her boss. Whether the talks succeed or fail, she said, at some point Mr. Bush will ''need to move forward at an appropriate time'' on missile defense tests that violate the ABM treaty's restrictions. The deputy secretary of defense, Paul D. Wolfowitz, told Congress recently that such time should be measured in months, not years. For Mr. Putin, the politics of the talks are complex, and one of the outstanding questions is whether he is really willing to give up the ABM treaty or whether he is simply testing Mr. Bush's bottom line. But he does stand to gain from a cut in offensive weapons. The United States now has about 7,000 strategic weapons; under Start II, the treaty to reduce strategic arms, the figure is supposed to fall to between 3,000 and 3,500. In 1997,  Presidents Clinton and Boris N. Yeltsin agreed in principle that those numbers could fall to 2,500 or below.  Mr. Putin talks of 1,500; Mr. Bush has never specified a number. In a brief statement, the two presidents did not state their intentions for the ABM treaty, nor did they address how or in what order the two issues would be taken up. The upbeat meeting with Mr. Putin today redeemed for Mr. Bush a summit meeting in this ancient port city that, until late today, had the makings of a fiasco. The three-day session was so overshadowed by violent anti-globalization demonstrations in the streets, which left one protester dead and more than 100 badly wounded, that Canada announced that next year's meeting of the seven largest industrial nations and Russia would be held in a small resort, Kananaskis,  an hour from Calgary, Alberta. Canada's prime minister, Jean Chrtien, clearly hopes that the site will prove remote enough to discourage demonstrators, who poured into Genoa by bus, rail and plane. And to restore the summit meetings to the kind of intimate gathering they were conceived as a quarter century ago, he insisted that each nation would be limited to 30 to 35 members at the central site. Mr. Bush's Secret Service detail is sometimes that size; here in Genoa, he was accompanied by somewhere between 800 and 1,000 staff members. Mr. Bush insisted today that the summit meeting was ''a success,'' and he stressed the discussions that took place with leaders of a handful of developing nations as evidence that the group was refocusing its attention on helping the world's poorest. But other leaders seemed relieved to be leaving town, and used considerable restraint in describing the meeting's accomplishments.''Everyone feels the G-8 has to continue,'' insisted Italy's prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, who now faces what could be a politically damaging inquiry into abuses here by the Italian police, including a raid on Saturday night on the headquarters of one of the main protest groups. The police went in swinging clubs, and today there were signs of blood in the building. A communiqu issued by the eight leaders -- from the United States, Britain, Japan, Germany, Italy, France, Canada and Russia -- made no progress on their most contentious issue: global warming. The European nations, Japan and Russia succeeded in isolating Mr. Bush in his opposition to the treaty, and after hours of negotiation the communiqu demonstrated that Mr. Bush had not budged from his insistence that the emissions restrictions that are part of the Kyoto Protocol would prove costly to the United States.''We all firmly agree on the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,'' the communiqu said. ''While there is currently disagreement on the Kyoto Protocol and its ratification, we are committed to working intensively together to meet our common objective.''Mr. Bush pointed instead to an agreement to set up a $1.3 billion United Nations fund to help people with AIDS and other communicable diseases, but that was negotiated before anyone arrived in Genoa. He also called for restarting the global trade talks that collapsed in Seattle in 1999, saying free trade is the way out of poverty. But at least in public, he never explicated the argument with much detail. While the annual meetings are rarely a hotbed of decisiveness, veterans of many such sessions said this one would be remembered more for the violence than for the accords. But Mr. Bush clearly hopes that it will be remembered, eventually, for something else: as the meeting that took the bite out of the opposition to his missile defense plan, and to the broader strategic rethinking behind it. And within hours of the announcement with Mr. Putin, it seemed to be having some of that effect. Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee and a critic of Mr. Bush's plans to break out of the ABM treaty, said on CNN today, ''This is very good news to me.'' The president's decision to open talks with the Russians, he added, ''implies at least to me'' that Mr. Bush ''will not break out of the ABM treaty in the meantime.''He concluded, ''You don't walk away from a treaty without a new system being in place.''Senator Tom Daschle, the Democratic leader, said he wanted to look at the development more closely, but added on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' that it was good for both sides ''to try to find ways to put forth constructive dialogue and ultimately come to some agreement here.''Daryl G. Kimball, directer of the Coalition to Reduce Nuclear Dangers, said, ''This acknowledges the reality of the U.S.-Russian strategic dialogue for years, that the United States' interest in missile defenses has stymied the achievement of reductions in offensive arsenals.''Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the Democratic vice presidential candidate last year, called it ''another indication of what those of us who support the development of a missile defense have been saying, which is that it's a new world.''The talks with Mr. Putin have also taken some pressure off Mr. Bush here in Europe. The Europeans had used Mr. Bush's determination to go ahead with missile defense as a symbol of American unilateralism, and warned that he risked alienating the Russians. But as a senior British official said when Mr. Bush was in London on Wednesday, ''if the Russians aren't complaining, we're certainly going to give the president some room.''Several months ago, Mr. Bush's top aides said they were prepared to offer Mr. Putin several incentives to abandon the ABM treaty and cooperate on a missile shield meant to repel such things as terrorist attacks, blackmail threats by rogue states, and accidental missile launchings. Mr. Putin traveled through Europe earlier this year drumming up opposition to an American missile defense system, claiming that it would prompt an arms race Russia could not afford but that it would pursue, if necessary. But then, after the Slovenia meeting, he took another tack, telling reporters that he believed that the missile defense system, if deployed, would not effectively counter Russia's huge nuclear arsenal for at least 25 years.''He's right,'' a senior Bush adviser said here. ''Actually, it's probably longer than that.'' If so, Mr. Putin may conclude that the coming talks are the only way of determining if the United States is truly willing to cut its nuclear arsenal dramatically. And there is a more subtle advantage for Mr. Putin: By haggling as an equal with Mr. Bush, he may help restore Russia's sense that it remains a major power in the world, despite its economic decline, its territorial shrinkage and its declining diplomatic influence. If an agreement is reached, the biggest effects may be on China, which will not be a party to the new talks. While Russia would retain a nuclear force able to overwhelm the kind of defense system that Mr. Bush has described, China's small nuclear force could well be countered. Only last week Mr. Putin and President Jiang Zemin of China signed a friendship treaty, but it is unclear how Mr. Putin plans to juggle the superpowers on his east and west flanks. GENOA SUMMIT MEETING: THE OVERVIEW

Early this morning, as 1,700 diplomats wrangled over final details of a long-embattled climate treaty, environmental campaigners went through a familiar drill.''We've already written two statements,'' said David Doniger, the climate policy director for the Natural Resources Defense Council. Depending on what happened sometime near dawn in the smoke-hazed halls of the Maritim Hotel, they would hand out what they viewed as news of a landmark environmental achievement or a disaster. For the second time in eight months, the fate of the Kyoto Protocol, the first treaty to require cuts in gases linked to global warming, came down to a marathon all-night session as countries sought to ensure that the agreement to protect the atmosphere did not harm their economies or other interests. The United States remained deeply immersed in the talks, but was on strict orders from the White House not to interfere with other countries' efforts to reach a consensus, even though President Bush rejected the treaty as ''fatally flawed.''Dozens of lobbyists for businesses that saw the treaty as either an opportunity or a threat -- ranging from coal companies to sellers of solar power -- also girded for the outcome this morning. The protocol would build on an existing climate treaty, signed by Mr. Bush's father in 1992, that called only for voluntary measures to reduce emissions. In subsequent years,  emissions steadily climbed. The last session on the Kyoto pact, in The Hague in November, collapsed after the United States and Europe clashed over whether countries should get credit toward emissions goals by planting forests, which absorb carbon dioxide, the dominant greenhouse gas. Now, with the United States mainly watching, the pressure has been on Europe and Japan to find a way to resolve any remaining impasses. European leaders, facing strong public concern about the issue, had been pushing for a deal in time to ratify the pact by next year, the 10th anniversary of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, where climate change first became a global issue. Japan faced a quandary. It had much face to lose, having been host to the pivotal session in 1997 in the ancient city that gave the protocol its name. But with the United States out of the pact, Japan also now had great leverage in the talks. And only with the support of Japan could Europe guarantee, under the complex architecture of the treaty, that the agreement would take effect. Late Saturday night, Jan Pronk of the Netherlands, the chairman of the talks, issued a 15-page list of compromises on disputed sections. Through Sunday the odds shifted hour by hour, with each side in the greenhouse gas debate spinning every gleaned fact in the direction of either hopeful or doubtful. An industry lobbyist who had spent a decade fighting against binding limits on greenhouse gases at climate talks said he was confident that the process would break down.''It's too big a load of issues to do it as one package and I'd be surprised if they're going to be able to get anything significant as a partial package,'' he said. Early this morning, Mr. Pronk played a high-stakes hand, calling a meeting of all the participating countries. He flatly rejected proposals to achieve formal agreement on everything that had been worked out so far. One of the press releases already written by Mr. Doniger's group had predicted this possible outcome, saying it was a good beginning. But Mr. Pronk said there would be no partial victory. ''I want to have full agreement,'' he said to the delegations. ''You've committed yourselves not to fail twice.''The closed-circuit televisions were shut down, clusters of dark-suited diplomats coursed like corpuscles through the hallways and night moved toward day as the work continued.

INTERNATIONALA2-9Bush and Putin Discuss New Defense Talks Stance  On the last day of a meeting of the leaders of the world's richest nations, President Bush and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia agreed to link discussions of American plans to deploy a missile defense system with the prospect of large cuts in both nuclear arsenals, hinting that if an accord was reached quickly it might take the place of the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. A1The national leaders and the leaders of groups that sought to protest peacefully at the summit meeting began reflecting on how to carry out their goals without repeating the violence that marked the meeting in Genoa. The national leaders sought a remote location for their next meeting, while the groups that came to march pondered how to deal with violent protesters. A9Indonesia Moves to Oust Leader  Indonesia's legislature began proceedings aimed at removing President Abdurrahman Wahid from office and ending the short, tempestuous rule of the country's first democratically elected leader in a generation. It planned to install Vice President Megawati Sukarnoputri as his successor. A1Rebels Enter Macedonia Town  Ethnic Albanian rebels have taken advantage of a NATO-brokered cease-fire in Macedonia to move into Tetovo and a few surrounding villages in an area of western Macedonia that is mainly populated by Albanians, right under the noses of government forces. A6Norway to Export Blubber  Norwegian whalers are preparing to export hundreds of tons of edible minke whale blubber to Japan in the face of widespread condemnation by nations that oppose whaling. Such exports would represent the first international trade in whale products in more than a decade. A6SCIENCE/HEALTHClimate Treaty Marathon  For the second time in eight months, the fate of the Kyoto Protocol, the first treaty to require cuts in gases linked to global warming, came down to a marathon all-night session as countries sought to ensure that the agreement to protect the atmosphere did not harm their economies or other interests. The United States remained immersed in the talks, but was on orders from the White House not to interfere with other countries' efforts to reach a consensus, even though President Bush rejected the treaty as ''fatally flawed.''A3Stem Cell Research Debate  As President Bush and Congress struggle with the question of regulating embryonic stem cell research, one fact is being overlooked: nearly two dozen states have laws that govern research on embryos and fetuses, and at least nine ban any experimenting with human embryos. A12Dinosaur Crossing  Plans to turn clay pits in Golden, Colo., into a golf course have prompted a dispute about measures to preserve dinosaur footprints. A10NATIONALA10-15Choice to Head Joint Chiefs Seen As Signal on Military  Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld has the opportunity in coming days to put an indelible personal stamp on the American military when he gives President Bush his recommendation for the next chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The selection of the nation's chief military adviser to the president is anticipated as a statement of how Mr. Rumsfeld expects to carry out Mr. Bush's defense priorities. A1Ethanol Gains Ground  Supporters of the fuel made from corn are gaining in their push to make it a major part of the nation's energy policy despite persistent doubts about its economic and environmental benefits. The Senate's new Democratic leaders and the Bush administration are promoting a growing number of measures to bolster ethanol demand. A1Cleanup in Baltimore  Crews worked to pull the last smoldering boxcars from a downtown tunnel, days after a train derailment and fire shut down parts of the city and disrupted Internet service nationwide. A10Shuttle on Its Way Home  Atlantis and its crew left the International Space Station and headed for home, their mission accomplished despite what one astronaut called ''bumps in the road.'' The shuttle is due back at Kennedy Space Center early tomorrow. A14Bar Report on Campaign Funds  States should provide public financing for campaigns for judgeships to limit the growing role of money in judicial politics, a study by the American Bar Association is to recommend this morning. A10Raising Capital, and Criticism  Haley Barbour, the Washington lobbyist and former chairman of the Republican National Committee, contends that the campaign finance system does not need to be overhauled -- and it is not hard to see why. Already, with the White House in Republican hands, he has become the capital's most successful lobbyist and party fund-raiser. Some advocates of revamping political donations are critical of his influence and his dual roles. A14ARTSE1-8Pitfalls for Performing Arts  The foremost presenters of the performing arts in Middle America, medium-size arts institutions, are likely to face financial strains and even sudden death, a study of 30-year trends in the performing arts has found. The RAND Corporation study concludes that in order to survive many of these groups will have to become more community oriented and adjust their budgets, programs and styles to build audiences. E1NEW YORK/REGIONB1-5Modern Concerns Threaten Those Old Swimming Holes  Coalitions of swimmers, land conservation groups and local officials are trying to save an endangered joy of summer, community swimming holes. In High Falls, 90 miles north of New York, and elsewhere around the nation, these popular spots are quietly fading away as an influx of affluent newcomers assert themselves as country landowners. They are fencing off the swimming holes, literally or figuratively, because they expect privacy at their bucolic hideaways and, in these increasingly litigious times, they fear being sued. A1Town Returns From the Dead  The rebirth of the stately American Hotel is the most visible symbol of the comeback of Sharon Springs, N.Y., a legendary but depopulated Brigadoon of gingerbready, abandoned Victorian resort hotels. Rooms are being rented at the American for the first time in five decades. Sharon Springs ''has literally come back from the dead,'' said State Senator James L. Seward, who represents the historic mineral-spring village and remembers when not a living soul stirred on Main Street. B1Candidate Criticizes Giuliani  The Republican mayoral candidate Michael R. Bloomberg, after weeks of offering little but praise for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, criticized Mr. Giuliani as being wrong in 1995 when he ousted Yasir Arafat from a concert for world leaders. B3EDUCATIONCity School Plan  Chancellor Harold O. Levy has ordered the New York City public school system's 32 district superintendents to meet with his deputies at least four times a year to analyze reams of data about their students, schools and teachers, and to outline strategies for improvement. The data, and the superintendents' responses to it, will factor heavily into their annual evaluations, which Mr. Levy began conducting last year. B1OBITUARIESB6Joan Bove  A New Yorker who helped make hair-coloring respectable by introducing stylists to a product called Clairol that she and her husband discovered in Paris, she was 99. B6Aveline Kushi  An advocate of a macrobiotic diet who taught cooking and helped found one of the first natural food stores in America, she was 78. B6SPORTSMONDAYD1-9Duval Wins British Open  David Duval captured his first major with a final round that started with four players tied for the lead, and ended as a defining performance for his career. D1BUSINESS DAYC1-12Cable Deal Is Seen  Walt Disney is close to buying Fox Family Worldwide from the News Corporation and its partner for $3.2 billion, people close to the deal said. The agreement, which is expected to be announced as early as today, would add to Disney's cable operations a network with 81 million subscribers in the United States, 24 million in Europe and 10 million in Latin America. C1Opposition to Hacker's Arrest  The arrest of a Russian programmer accused of violating an American digital copyright law has stirred opposition, both against the law itself and Adobe Systems, the software company that initiated the case. C1Stock Scandal in India  India's anticorruption police arrested the former head of the country's largest mutual fund and three of its officials on charges of defrauding the fund of millions of dollars. C2Cell-Phone Chips For Sale  Motorola plans to announce today that it will sell its most advanced cell-phone microchip sets, software and production tools to anyone who wants to buy them, including major rivals of its own handset unit. C2Architect Hired as Adviser  Cond Nast has hired the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas as an adviser to its magazines. C10Business DigestC1EDITORIALA16-17Editorials: Mr. Bush's Genoa diplomacy; rethinking Mexican immigration; unhealthy cuts for Head Start. Columns: William Safire, Bob Herbert. BridgeE5  Public LivesA10  CrosswordE6  TV ListingsE7  Metro DiaryB2  WeatherD10

A wallflower at what might have been its own victory party, the United States could only watch yesterday as 178 countries agreed on a deal that salvages the 1997 Kyoto Protocol and commits the rest of the industrialized world to orderly, mandatory reductions in the gases that are believed responsible for the warming of the earth's atmosphere. The door was left open for the Bush administration to sign on at any time in the future. But that seems unlikely. President Bush has already called the treaty ''fatally flawed,'' and nothing said yesterday by Paula Dobriansky, the under secretary of state who led an essentially irrelevant American delegation at the talks, suggested any change in Mr. Bush's thinking. The agreement must still be ratified by 55 industrialized countries, and even then will not be nearly as effective as it might have been if the United States, which emits one-fourth of the world's greenhouse gases, had signed on. Even so, the agreement will immediately increase the pressure on the administration to develop a plausible alternative strategy. Key Democrats are already calling for big reductions in carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas, through cleaner power plants, industrial processes and vehicles. There is also pressure from the business community. Many corporate leaders are convinced that the United States will eventually have to join in fighting global warming, and would prefer to begin making capital investments now than waiting until the last minute, when the job will be more expensive. Some corporate leaders are also worried that without binding targets, American companies will have no incentive to develop technologies to reduce global warming gases, thereby ceding a lucrative market to the Europeans and the Japanese. The huge irony is that this agreement was tailored in many respects to American specifications -- and with an eye to reducing the putative burdens on America's economy that Mr. Bush used as an excuse to abandon not only the protocol but also his campaign pledge to impose mandatory controls on carbon dioxide. The agreement includes at least two important strategies that President Bill Clinton and Al Gore insisted on in Kyoto four years ago. One is an emissions trading scheme that is designed to use market mechanisms to allow countries to achieve their emissions targets at the lowest possible cost. The other is the so-called ''clean development mechanism'' under which rich countries can earn credits by providing cutting-edge clean-air technologies to poorer countries. Cementing the deal required softening some of Kyoto's emissions targets as well as making concessions to Japan, which sought and received extra credits toward its target for protecting its forests, which act as a ''sink'' for carbon dioxide through photosynthesis. And while the revised agreement gives extra credit to Japan for protecting its own forests, it perversely awards no credit at all for projects designed to stop tropical deforestation elsewhere. But even the severest critics conceded that these shortcomings were not disqualifying given the importance of the agreement as a whole. The hope now is to have the necessary ratifications in hand by the 10th anniversary of the 1992 Rio Summit on global warming in Johannesburg next year. It was at Rio that Mr. Bush's father first committed the United States to a global effort to reduce greenhouse gases. There is still time for his son to honor that commitment.

INTERNATIONALA3-11178 Nations, but Not U.S., Agree on Emissions Curbs  One hundred seventy-eight countries agreed in Bonn to require industrial countries to cut emissions of gases linked to global warming, a deal that rescued the preliminary accord, the Kyoto Protocol, by softening it. The United States stayed on the sideline. President Bush has repudiated Kyoto as ''fatally flawed'' for placing too much of the clean-up burden on industrial countries and for being too costly to the American economy. A1Pope's Plea on Embryos  John Paul II, speaking with President Bush at his side, condemned creation of human embryos for research as an evil akin to euthanasia and infanticide. Mr. Bush is weighing whether to allow federal financing for embryonic stem cell research. A1Bush Firm on Missile Shield  President Bush said that ''time is of the essence'' in new arms talks with Moscow and warned that he would move ahead with testing antimissile technology even if he did not reach an agreement on scrapping the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972. His comments came a day after he and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia agreed to ''consultations'' on nuclear weapons cuts and discussions on defensive technologies. A8National security experts in the Democratic Party are pushing Congressional Democrats to unite behind an alternative to missile defense. A8Push to Ban Biological Arms  European nations and other major powers urged completion of a draft agreement to enforce the 1972 ban on biological weapons, a move at odds with the Bush administration, which concluded that the draft was flawed beyond repair. A11Transfer of Power in Jakarta  Megawati Sukarnoputri was sworn in as president in the most peaceful transfer of power in Indonesia's history, moments after the nation's top legislative body voted to cut short the fractious tenure of her predecessor, Abdurrahman Wahid, who refused to recognize the action. A1World BriefingA6NATIONALA12-17Bush Advisers Recommend Amnesty for Mexican Aliens  A cabinet-level panel has recommended that President Bush endorse a limited plan giving permanent legal status to some of the three million Mexicans thought to be living illegally in the United States. The plan, which would require Congressional approval, grew out of discussions between Mr. Bush and President Vicente Fox of Mexico. A1U.S. Lets Thai Boy Stay  Attorney General John Ashcroft gave ''humanitarian parole'' to a 4-year-old Thai boy with AIDS, Phanupong Khaisri, who was used as a decoy in a human-trafficking scheme, saying the United States should not deport him. The boy has been with a Los Angeles couple who want to adopt him. His grandparents are seeking custody and his return to Thailand. A12Exile Dissension in Miami  Ninoska Prez Castellon has become the latest prominent member of the Cuban American National Foundation to leave the exile group in a generational clash over ideology and leadership since the death of its founder, Jorge Mas Canosa, in 1997. A12Maneuvering on Patients' Bill  Senior House Republican aides said Republicans were seeking votes to defeat a bipartisan patients' bill of rights favored by Democrats, opposed by President Bush and tentatively set for a vote this week. A15A Second Baptism  The Vatican has decided that Mormons must be rebaptized before converting to Catholicism, effectively treating Mormon converts as Mormons deal with Catholics who embrace Mormonism. The decision, following a similar move by the United Methodist Church a year ago, rubs against Mormon efforts to be clearly understood as a Christian church. A17Talking While Driving  About 3 percent of daytime drivers in the United States -- or about 500,000 -- are using hand-held cell phones at any given moment, the government said in its first on-the-street survey of phone use in vehicles. A14NEW YORK/REGIONB1-7Deadly Currents Claim Three Young Lives  Four cousins wading in knee-deep water at a beach in Far Rockaway, Queens, were swept away by fierce currents while their uncle and scores of other people watched helplessly from shore. The three girls, ages 12, 13 and 16, drowned, but the boy, age 11, made it back to shore. A1New Tack on Drug Laws  Governor Pataki, seeking to revive moribund efforts with Democrats to soften Rockefeller-era drug laws, would give many more defendants the chance to undergo drug treatment rather than long prison terms. B1New Bishop for Newark  Bishop John J. Myers, the head of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Peoria, Ill., is to be introduced today as the new archbishop of Newark. B1Ranking Regional Tax Loads  Connecticut, New York and New Jersey rank first, second and third among the 50 states in state and local taxes, with New York the leader in local taxes, a census study found. B4SCIENCE TIMESF1-10U.S. Eases Research Ban  A federal agency investigating the death of a volunteer in a study at Johns Hopkins University said it would partly lift its four-day-old suspension of human research there. A1Health & FitnessF5ARTSE1-8Storied Bookshop Moving On  The Gotham Book Mart, the most tradition-bound of all New York bookstores, has put its cluttered West 47th Street town house up for sale for $7.9 million and is planning to move to a new modern home. E1OBITUARIESB8-9Eudora Welty  The writer whose evocative short stories made her a revered figure in contemporary American letters was 92 years old. A1BUSINESS DAYC1-16AOL Investment in Amazon  Amazon. com got a $100 million investment from AOL Time Warner, part of a broader deal in which AOL will buy technology from Amazon to operate its online shopping channels. Amazon reported quarterly results showing sales short of expectations but losses lower than analysts projected. C1Internet Venture Hurt AT&T  AT&T lost $149 million loss in the second quarter, hurt by a swift erosion of revenue from long-distance operations and a $1.1 billion plunge in the value of its Net2Phone investment. C2Lucent Moves to Sell a Unit  Lucent Technologies was said to be near a deal to sell its fiber optic business to Furukawa Electric and Corning for $2.75 billion to raise cash. C1Business DigestC1World BusinessW1SPORTSD1-8Ewing Tells of Sex Favors  Patrick Ewing testified that he twice received sexual favors from dancers at an Atlanta stip club at the heart of a federal racketeering trial. A12FASHIONB10EDITORIALA18-19Editorials: Isolated on global warming; a new Indonesian leader; taking care of Gracie Mansion; Mississippi's teacher salaries.  Column: Thomas L. Friedman. CrosswordE6  TV ListingsE7  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8

On his trip to Asia, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell insisted that Japan, with which Washington wants to strengthen its ties, would be the first port of call. By going out of his way to put Tokyo at the top of his five-nation list -- if only for seven waking hours -- the secretary wanted to demonstrate Japan's importance to the United States. But soon after arriving here Monday night, he discovered that the new government of Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi, by agreeing to a compromise with the Europeans, had played the pivotal role in isolating the United States at a conference of the world's industrialized countries on climate change. In so doing, Japan rescued the Kyoto protocol on climate change from extinction and increased the possibility of eventual ratification of the treaty that President Bush has said his administration will have no part of. Secretary Powell put the best face on the Japanese move, saying that Mr. Koizumi had expressed a preference for finding a way ''to move forward with the United States.''The Bush administration has welcomed the popular Mr. Koizumi as a breath of fresh air in a stagnant political and economic scene here and is placing considerable faith in his ability to pull off an ambitious economic reform program. In the longer term, Secretary Powell and Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage have said that they want to strengthen the military relationship with Japan and, in particular, hope that the Japanese will take on more responsibilities in the region. Mr. Armitage, who is the secretary's closest adviser, argued last year in a widely read paper, which was also co-authored by other senior Bush administration officials, that the special relationship between the United States and Britain should be the model for the Japanese-American alliance. But before tackling that, Secretary Powell and Mr. Armitage argue that Japan must improve its economy. The omens for the economy were quite mixed as Secretary Powell arrived. The Tokyo stock exchange tumbled to a 16-year low Monday, apparently in alarm over aspects of Mr. Koizumi's proposed economic austerity program. The Prime Minister has said he will force Japanese banks to write off bad loans, estimated at between $300 billion and $1.2 trillion. Secretary Powell met today with Japanese economic specialists assembled at the American embassy for a roundtable discussion. The idea was for him to learn more about the economic reform agenda. He then met with Mr. Koizumi, who had just returned from the Genoa summit of industrialized countries. The State Department worked overtime to try to ensure that Secretary Powell's brief interlude here was not dominated by recent incidents of American soldiers who have been arrested at the Okinawa base.  But in the Japanese press, the arrest of an American soldier on charges of rape and his eventual release to the custody of Japanese authorities has dominated. The Japanese were critical that it took four days for the Pentagon to hand over the soldier for what the Japanese called a heinous crime. The secretary said the United States does ''everything we can to instruct our youngsters as to how to behave as guests in Japan, especially in Okinawa, but there will be these occasional incidents.''Overall, the secretary stressed,  the 50,000 American troops in Japan ''are playing an important and valuable role.''''I don't think it is possible,'' he said ''for us to remove our presence from Okinawa and I don't think that is the position of the Japanese government.''

With the Bush administration on the sidelines, the world's leading countries hammered out a compromise agreement today finishing a treaty that for the first time would formally require industrialized countries to cut emissions of gases linked to global warming. The agreement, which was announced here today after three days of marathon bargaining, rescued the Kyoto Protocol, the preliminary accord framed in Japan in 1997, that was the first step toward requiring cuts in such gases. That agreement has been repudiated by President Bush, who has called it ''fatally flawed,'' saying it places too much of the cleanup burden on industrial countries and would be too costly to the American economy. Today, his national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said in Rome, where the president met with the pope, ''I don't believe that it is a surprise to anyone that the United States believes that this particular protocol is not in its interests, nor do we believe that it really addresses the problem of global climate change.'' She reiterated that the president had created a task force to come up with alternatives. The agreement by 178 countries was largely the product of give and take involving Japan, Australia, Canada and the European Union. But Japan's role was crucial because it is the largest economy after the United States and its opposition would have killed any agreement. Largely as a result of concessions to Japan, the product is a significantly softened version of the Kyoto accord, allowing industrial nations with the greatest emissions of greenhouse gases, principally carbon dioxide, to achieve their cuts with greater flexibility. For example, Japan won a provision to receive credits for reducing the gases by protecting forests that absorb carbon dioxide. Still, the agreement is a binding contract among nations -- excluding the United States -- under which 38 industrialized countries must reduce those emissions by 2012 or face tougher emissions goals. Those countries now account for close to half of the emissions. The agreement now moves to a complex ratification process that calls for approval from the biggest polluting countries, which can be achieved even with United States opposition. Officials from the European Union exulted over the compromise. Olivier Deleuze, the energy and sustainability secretary of Belgium, said there were easily 10 things in the final texts that he could criticize. ''But,'' he said, ''I prefer an imperfect agreement that is living than a perfect agreement that doesn't exist.''The Kyoto accord calls for the 38 industrialized countries by 2012 to reduce their combined annual gas emissions to 5.2 percent below levels measured in 1990. It set a different, negotiated target for each, with Japan, for example, accepting a target of cutting gas emissions back to 6 percent below 1990 emissions. Those targets were included in the Kyoto agreement and were untouched by the compromise today. Developing countries do not have to do anything to reduce emissions. The biggest sticking point was how much to penalize countries that miss their targets. Japan held out for a fairly painless system. Europe wanted countries that missed targets in the first commitment period, from 2008 to 2012, to pledge to reduce more carbon dioxide in the next period, with the equivalent of penalties plus interest. On that point, Europe got its way. The talks also clarified the design of the first global system for buying and selling credits earned by reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Such a system tends to focus investment in pollution cleanups where the job can be done effectively and cheaply. In general, Japan was in the driver's seat. After Mr. Bush rejected the treaty, Japan became a pivotal player. It sought, and received, extra credits toward its emissions goals for protecting its forests. Forest experts calculated that the credits for forests essentially would drop Japan's target from 6 percent below 1990 levels to just 2 percent below. Canada and Russia would gain large forest credits as well. But climate scientists said that in most cases the forest credits were not as big a gift as they seemed, and that economic growth -- if continued as projected -- would put all the industrialized countries listed under the treaty 15 or 20 percent above their 1990 levels. So a drop even close to 1990 figures would be a big change, they said, essentially lessening the benefit of the forest credits. Still, some participants grumbled about countries getting credit for gas reductions ''by watching trees grow,'' as one environmentalist put it. The compromise was laced with of something for just about everyone. The European Union pledged $410 million a year through the first years of the treaty to help developing countries adapt to climate change and build the technological ability to avoid adding to the problem. That was something demanded by, among others, Saudi Arabia, among the group of developing countries that are not required to reduce their emissions. The difficulties in moving ahead on the Kyoto Protocol far exceeded those surrounding other environmental treaties, experts said, because the treaty, by controlling carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, would limit something released by almost every act of daily living. That this was an economic as well as environmental treaty was evident at every turn.''This protocol is about the climate, but it is also about the interests of each country,'' explained Ali Al-Naimi, the Saudi oil minister. Indeed, he said, Saudi Arabia's interest lay not so much in curtailing gases, but in preventing economic disruption should the treaty lead the world to curtail its use of oil. Much of the momentum appeared to be maintained personally by Jan Pronk, the indefatigable Dutch environment minister and chairman of the talks here. Mr. Pronk often locked himself in a room with clusters of delegates. By dawn today, dozens of delegates were sprawled asleep on every spare cushion and couch in the meeting rooms of the Maritim Hotel. In the end, the diverse array of countries at the table, faced with the possibility of an embarrassing collapse of the entire treaty, overcame their differences. The compromise caps a six-year struggle between a group of industries and countries that claimed mandatory emissions caps would harm economies, and environmental groups and other nations that saw such limits as the only way to stave off potentially disruptive climate shifts. At the meeting, there were unusual combinations of interests, with companies that build nuclear power plants eager to jump into the climate fight because nuclear power produces electricity without emitting greenhouse gases. Japan, Canada, China and other countries supported credits toward emission targets by substituting nuclear power. But the European Union, despite wide use of nuclear power in some large European countries, insisted there be no nuclear option in the agreement. To some of the participants here, the achievement was a bit hollow given that the United States, which by some measurements accounts for about 25 percent of greenhouse gases, chose not to participate. Others noted that, among them, the three dozen industrialized countries that supported the treaty language accounted for far more emissions than the United States. Environmental campaigners said Europe had proved it could lead despite its sometimes fragmented appearance.''There's really a new force on the world stage,'' said Philip Clapp, the president of the National Environmental Trust, a lobbying group based in Washington. ''If the United States will not lead, Europe can and will.''Many of the negotiators from other countries held out hope that, eventually, the United States would rejoin the pact. Chances of that happening in the short run are slim. During the session celebrating the accord, Paula Dobrianksy, the under secretary of state for global affairs, congratulated the parties to the protocol but reiterated a common theme of the Bush administration -- that it was ''not sound policy.'' She did not come to Bonn with any alternative ideas. Japan's environment minister, Yoriko Kawaguchi, in a clear reference to the United States, said it was important to try to build a bridge between the Kyoto process and countries waiting on the sidelines.''In order to achieve the objectives of the Kyoto Protocol, we need to have the widest possible participation of countries,'' Ms. Kawaguchi said. ''We should try to encourage all our friends to join us in our common effort to address global warming.''178 NATIONS REACH A CLIMATE ACCORD  Correction:  July 25, 2001, Wednesday  A front-page article yesterday about an international accord to combat climate change misspelled the name of the under secretary of state for global affairs who represented the United States. She is Paula Dobriansky, not Dobrianksy. Correction: July 25, 2001, WednesdayA front-page article yesterday about an international accord to combat climate change misspelled the name of the under secretary of state for global affairs who represented the United States. She is Paula Dobriansky, not Dobrianksy.

The 178 countries that completed a treaty on Monday aimed at curbing global warming may have to wait a very long time before President Bush, who rejected the pact, puts any alternative on the tableThe 178 countries that completed a treaty on Monday aimed at curbing global warming may have to wait a very long time before President Bush, who rejected the pact, puts any alternative on the table, some American officials say. Mr. Bush and members of his administration have repeatedly said that they consider climate change a serious issue, that greenhouse gases eventually need to be stabilized and that they are reviewing options. But some officials involved in the policy review, and business executives and experts who have briefed the cabinet, say there appears to be little, if any, pressure from the top to come up with something soon. The highest echelons at the White House, they say, see little need to amplify what was said last month, when Mr. Bush made a Rose Garden speech and a cabinet panel headed by Vice President Dick Cheney issued a 32-page report on the subject.''There is going to be a Phase 2, but what happens depends on domestic political pressure,'' said one American official involved in parts of the administration's policy review. Global warming has been a major topic in Europe, where various Green parties exert a powerful influence in several countries, but it generally remains far down on lists of day-to-day concerns in the United States, fading in and out of the news.''There's a sense in which everybody's saying the American public doesn't have the attention span or background to pay attention to this issue,'' the official said. ''There's still a hopeful perception around the White House that this has gone away.''White House officials defend the slow pace of the review, saying it reflects the importance and complexity of curbing the rising concentrations of carbon dioxide, which is a basic byproduct of burning fuels and thus a result of almost every daily activity.''The long-term goal is stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere,'' a senior White House official said recently. ''But our approach must be measured, flexible and consistent with economic growth and prosperity.''In the meantime, by standing firm against binding restrictions, particularly in the form of a treaty, Mr. Bush is satisfying conservative Republicans, who rarely support treaties on global problems. Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, has long objected to the treaty on curbing gases that contribute to global warming, which is called the Kyoto Protocol. On Monday, he praised the president and American negotiators for steering clear. He and the president both say the treaty threatened the economy and is unfair because emissions cuts are required only of the 38 top industrialized countries, and not of developing nations. Mr. Hagel, who was once an outspoken skeptic on the science of global warming, now believes that it is a serious problem and is interested in legislation to tackle it. In the absence of a new policy direction from the president, the driving force at home now appears to be Congress. This month alone, there have been several proposed bills and three Congressional hearings on global warming. Over all, experts say, it is becoming clear that rejection of the Kyoto treaty will not stand as a substitute for action for much longer.''Kyoto has become something of an albatross,'' said William K. Reilly, who was administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under Mr. Bush's father. ''Deficiencies with Kyoto are advanced as a reason not to address the climate problem seriously. It's as if it's the only mode for addressing the problem.''Mr. Reilly worked on the first climate treaty, the 1992 Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was signed by the first President Bush nine years ago, but was strictly voluntary. That earlier accord gave rise to the Kyoto Protocol, which is expected to be formally adopted at a meeting in the fall in Marrakesh, Morocco. For now, the Bush administration is focusing on developing a plan to improve research on causes of global warming and on ways to capture greenhouse gases with new technologies. The only international initiative Mr. Bush has announced is new work with Central and South American countries to promote conservation of forests, which absorb carbon dioxide. Some officials from Europe, which spearheaded the drive to finish the details of the treaty in Bonn, have sensed the lack of political urgency in the United States and expressed deep frustration over the situation.''We've fallen into a trap,'' said one European diplomat. ''We knew that Bush wasn't going to accede to Kyoto and gave him a bit of space to let him develop a policy. But the upshot is there's nothing.''

Midway through President Bush's journey across Europe, from the friendly terrain of Britain to the violent protests in Genoa to the bleak border between Kosovo and Macedonia, a senior German official offered this revised assessment of how the president is viewed by his closest allies.''We're getting used to him,'' he said. It was a phrase that came up often on this trip, six months into Mr. Bush's presidency, as a prelude to both guarded praise and harsh criticism. If Mr. Bush's first foray to Europe in June was, to use his own phrase, all about ''icebreaking,'' this one was mostly deal-making. And his performance alternately perplexed and pleased. Over the week the Europeans saw all the contradictory shades that have made him so hard to define in domestic politics: the defiant Bush, the obstinate Bush, the creative Bush, and the malleable Bush. Mr. Bush was defiant when it came to the protests that racked Genoa during the meeting of the leaders of the world's largest industrialized nations and Russia. He declared the people on the streets plain wrong, saying they should just accept as a matter of fact that free trade is the only path out of poverty. He appeared not the least bit interested in entertaining the intellectual arguments about whether borderless competition worsens the gap between rich and poor.''I know what I believe,'' he said Sunday night in the Roman Forum and added, ''and I believe what I believe is right.''He was obstinate when the subject turned to the Kyoto Protocol on global warming. Mr. Bush told the leaders in Genoa that they should sit and wait until his administration came up with an alternative plan, but he would not say when. So they papered over their dispute in the meeting's communiqu and then delivered him a stinging rebuke in Bonn, where a simultaneous conference resolved long disputes over specific language on how countries will define and limit their emissions of carbon dioxide. One hundred and seventy-eight countries agreed, but not the United States. Yet Mr. Bush seemed just to shrug when asked whether the United States had isolated itself. His aides suggested the treaty was worth little if Washington did not sign, leading one senior Japanese official to ask a reporter how long it would take for the White House team to ''rid itself of this American arrogance.''But at the next moment, Europe saw the creative Bush, who can capitalize on his freshness to the world scene to force a rethinking of old approaches. In this case, the issue was the balance of nuclear terror 12 years after the cold war ended. By the end of the week, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia all said that Mr. Bush was right to force the world to think about a new ''strategic framework'' that links drastic cuts in bloated, unnecessary nuclear arsenals to the first talks over missile defenses. Mr. Bush looked elated. ''You saw the president yesterday,'' he said of Mr. Putin. ''I thought he was very forward-leaning, as they say in diplomatic nuanced circles.'' Then Mr. Berlusconi stepped in to suggest, ever so gently, that Mr. Bush would be wise to tone down his threats about dumping the Antiballistic Missile Treaty if Mr. Putin does not reach an accord soon enough.''They come from a past,'' Mr. Berlusconi said of the Russians. ''They were a world power. They had a very strong fall as far as their economy was concerned.'' But they have ''that old pride,'' he said. And then, driving home the point to Mr. Bush, he said, ''I believe that this can all be done without unilateral measures.''Finally, Mr. Bush came close to full circle on a position he took in the campaign: that American troops should withdraw as soon as practical from the Balkans, leaving the Europeans to keep the peace. When Mr. Bush landed at Camp Bondsteel in Kosovo this morning, he told the troops that they play a vital role, declaring that America and its allies ''came in together, and we will leave together.''His only nod to his old view is the statement that ''our goal is to hasten the day when peace is self-sustaining,'' which was, in the end, the goal of President Clinton before him. The Balkan experience has convinced the Europeans of one thing: Mr. Bush can, under the right conditions, be persuaded to change his mind. A senior French official at the Genoa meeting said the caricatures that filled the French press for months of a dumb cowboy are ''plain silly.''''He's a good listener,'' the official said. ''He has his convictions, but it's not as though he's not open to discussion.''But these many faces of the new president have left the Europeans posing the same question as Congressional Democrats: when Mr. Bush says he wants to consult, does he mean he wants to converse for a while then go ahead as planned? And how does one reconcile his seeming absence of intellectual curiosity about the roiling debate over globalization with his intense engagement on the subject of nuclear defenses and embryonic stem cell research? Perhaps one reason that it is taking the world so long to get used to Mr. Bush is that his interests bear little resemblance to Bill Clinton's. Mr. Clinton could wax on for hours about the pros and cons of a free trade and its intersection with domestic and world politics. In fact, he would talk about the issue so much that he got himself into trouble. Mr. Clinton's public musing about strategies to spread American-style environmental standards and labor rights around the world so terrified developing nations at the Seattle trade conference in 1999 that they sank Mr. Clinton's hopes for another round of global trade talks.''Our responsibility is to help countries prepare for the new world they are entering, not to talk endlessly,'' said Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, during a break in the Genoa meeting. ''Rather than say. 'On-the-one-hand, on-the-other-hand,' President Bush has a concrete way to say to Senegal and El Salvador, 'This will help you.' ''Mr. Bush's fellow leaders, when speaking publicly, say they detect signs that he is becoming more internationalist as he gains experience. ''We were all pleased by his new orientation,'' President Jacques Chirac of France said at the end of the Genoa meeting, where Mr. Bush had solicited Mr. Chirac's views at length on the Middle East. But it will be a long while before Mr. Bush can erase the early image  of a man who defines America's national interests narrowly and who looks to unilateralism when frustrated by slow diplomacy. Of course, it took Mr. Clinton more than two years to define his diplomatic style and one senior American diplomat, a veteran of the debates over Bosnia, noted this weekend that ''getting him to the right place wasn't pretty.'' Getting Mr. Bush there, in the midst of the global warming debate and the fragile new arms talks with Russia, may not be much prettier. News Analysis

To the Editor:Re ''178 Nations Reach a Climate Accord; U.S. Only Looks On'' (front page, July 24):The Bush administration's refusal essentially to acknowledge that global warming is primarily due to man-made emissions of carbon dioxide flies in the face of more than 25 years of sound scientific research by some of the most rigorous scientists in the United States and abroad. If scientific knowledge is ignored in shaping critical policy decisions, then clearly decisions will be made based solely on narrow political interests. The administration should endorse the Kyoto agreement and move rapidly forward to show the world how to reduce carbon dioxide emissions without a reduction in economic output. Climate change does not discriminate; it will affect the United States as well as all other countries. The longer we dawdle, the harder the problem is to solve. PAUL FALKOWSKI  New Brunswick, N.J., July 24, 2001The writer is a professor of geology at Rutgers University.

The United States rejected an international accord aimed at enforcing a 1972 treaty banning germ weapons, but said it would continue looking for ways to salvage the proposalThe United States today rejected an international accord aimed at enforcing a 1972 treaty banning germ weapons but said it would continue looking for ways to salvage the proposal. The American decision appeared to effectively scuttle an attempt to strengthen the original United Nations treaty that prohibits developing, producing or possessing biological weapons. The agreement, or protocol, that was rejected by the Bush administration today was aimed at providing compliance provisions that were lacking in the treaty.''We don't think it can achieve its objectives, nor can it be fixed,'' said the chief negotiator for the United States, Donald A. Mahley, referring to the proposed accord. His remarks ended weeks of speculation about American opposition to an effort that sought to thwart germ warfare while at the same time allowing legitimate commercial use of biological materials. The United States announced its decision during the final session of negotiations by 56 nations. Reading his statement to a hushed crowd at the United Nations European headquarters, Mr. Mahley said, ''In our assessment, the draft protocol would put national security and confidential business information at risk.''Mr. Mahley, who has been the top American negotiator on the biological pact since 1993, said the administration still supported the germ warfare treaty, but he appeared to close the door on any incremental changes in the draft enforcement pact to win Washington's support. He argued that the current effort would not improve ''confidence in compliance and will do little to deter those countries seeking to develop biological weapons.''In Washington, a senior administration official said that at least 37 items in the proposal made it ''unacceptable'' and that the Clinton administration had also had the same concerns that the Bush administration now has. But Elisa Harris, a former Clinton administration official who worked to strengthen the germ treaty, said the Clinton administration would most probably have worked with European and Asian allies to ''achieve a draft protocol that met all of our requirements.''Barbara H. Rosenberg, spokesman for the Federation of American Scientists, agreed, saying the current protocol, despite its flaws, was the ''most effective way to strengthen the treaty.''The alternatives being considered by the Bush administration drew mixed reviews from arms control advocates. Michael L. Moodie, a former arms control negotiator, said that while he supported the administration's rejection of the draft protocol, the administration would not find much international support for the alternatives it had discussed so far. He called proposals to strengthen export controls and criminalize violations of the treaty ''not really alternatives to an international framework.''Amy Smithson, an arms control expert with the Henry L. Stimson Center in Washington, called the protocol a ''lemon.''''The wheels would have fallen off the car before it got off the lot,'' she said. ''But it is incumbent upon the administration to get back to the negotiating table soon with realistic proposals to strengthen the treaty.''A senior administration official said that was what the White House intended. ''Give us a chance,'' he said, emphasizing President Bush's commitment to bolstering the treaty, but through innovative approaches. ''This is not a temper tantrum,'' the official said. ''We're not walking out.''He said the administration knew that negotiators in Geneva had to decide what they should report to the conference that will take up the protocol in November. ''We have a stake in that outcome,'' he said. ''But biological arms control requires new ways of thinking about how to stop the spread of these unique weapons.''Turning its back on the proposed accord is the latest in Bush administration policy positions that have run counter to European thinking. Washington has already upset its allies by threatening to abandon the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972 and rebuffing a treaty on climate change known as the Kyoto Protocol. Nevertheless, most of the countries that took part in the seven years of negotiations on biological weapons verification appeared resigned to the American withdrawal from the agreement.''It's not worth having without the Americans signing up,'' said Elizabeth March, spokesman for the British disarmament negotiating team, which has been a leading supporter of the draft pact. ''It wouldn't be worth the paper it's written on.''

With the United States now alone in the world in opposing the treaty to combat global warming, some lawmakers are pressing for Congress to take the lead toward reducing emissions of so-called greenhouse gases, the issue on which the Bush administration has so far kept to the sidelines. Both Democratic and Republican Congressional aides say it is now likely that Congress will pass one or more measures this year calling for cuts in emissions of carbon dioxide, a main provision of the Kyoto global-warming treaty. But it is less clear whether majorities would back the mandatory restrictions spelled out in the treaty and rejected by the administration, or whether they would favor a voluntary approach. Still, when Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, arrived on Capitol Hill this morning, she heard calls for Congress to make up for the administration's inaction this week in Bonn, where the United States opted out of an agreement on the Kyoto treaty that was backed by more than 180 countries.''The administration can refuse to commit the United States to the Kyoto accord; that is their choice,'' Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont told Mrs. Whitman at a hearing on power plant emissions that was his debut as chairman of the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, a job he won in May by shifting his party affiliation to independent from Republican.''But this Congress, this Senate, and especially this committee will not let our international partners down,'' Mr. Jeffords said. ''We plan to take steps to reduce our nation's contribution to this growing problem by working with industry to reduce carbon emissions.''The White House has criticized the Kyoto treaty as ''fatally flawed,'' saying its provisions are unfair to the United States. This morning, Mrs. Whitman defended the administration's go-slow approach in offering any alternative to the treaty, saying it would be premature to present any plan for carbon dioxide reductions until further studies are completed.''We're still a long way from knowing how to solve the problem,'' she said. Emissions of carbon dioxide are widely regarded as the main contributor to global warming, and the United States is the world's largest source of that gas, about one-third of which comes from old coal-burning power plants. The Bush administration's refusal to adopt mandatory limits on carbon dioxide has put it at odds not only with Europe and Japan, but also with senators like Mr. Jeffords, who has introduced a bill requiring power plants to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. The bill is also sponsored by 2 Republican senators from Maine, Susan Collins and Olympia J. Snowe, and 12 Democrats. Other measures to reduce carbon dioxide emissions are also floating around Congress, including some, like one that Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, is expected to introduce next week, that would stop short of mandatory restrictions in favor of voluntary measures. Even as the administration scrambles to come up with its own stand on the issue, the Congressional aides and several senators said, the pressures of public opinion and concern over international fallout appear to have added to a view that Congress would be irresponsible to do nothing.''Very few of us up here want to have America seen as not participating in something that's important,'' Mr. Hagel said in a telephone interview. He said that what happened in Bonn had redoubled a sense of broad support for doing something. Senator Jeff Bingaman, the New Mexico Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, said, ''I certainly feel that leadership's got to come from somewhere. It's not coming from the administration.''''And I think it would be a failure for us,'' Mr. Bingaman said, ''to just sit by idly and let the rest of the world work on this problem while our scientists tell us that the problem is very real.''Today's hearings on the subject were the first since the breakup of the Bonn meetings, and a sense of frustration over the administration not offering an alternative was evident even among Republicans who have been supportive of the White House position. Their comments may have reflected recent opinion polls showing that increasing numbers of Americans see the problem as serious. In the months before the Kyoto treaty was framed in 1997, the Senate voted 95 to 0 for a resolution opposing any treaty that would reduce carbon dioxide emissions unless developing  countries were also made subject to the rules that would bind industrialized countries like the United States. The Bush administration has often pointed to that vote as an indication that a treaty requiring mandatory cuts in carbon dioxide emissions could never win Senate ratification. But supporters of mandatory measures point out that the mounting evidence of the scope and potential severity of climate change problems that has emerged in the last four years has significantly altered both the political and the scientific debates. Senator George V. Voinovich, Republican of Ohio, told Mrs. Whitman, ''The fact of the matter is that we need to deal with the carbon issue, substantively and politically.''In a telephone interview, Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and a leading critic of the administration's policy, was more explicit, saying: ''What happened in Bonn has reinvigorated the notion that the United States is in a very unfortunate position, which encourages many here to think that we've got to take some steps to respond domestically, to put the United States in better graces.''President Bush has said that his administration takes the problem of climate change seriously and is determined to address it. But he has criticized the Kyoto treaty because it does not require immediate action from developing countries and because, he has argued, the steep cuts it would require in carbon dioxide emissions would exact a heavy cost to the American economy. The administration has said little about its plans since last month when Mr. Bush promised more money for research into causes and possible solutions to global warming. Administration officials now say that the White House hopes to come up with an alternative to the Kyoto plan in time for the next meeting of the Kyoto group, in October. Today's hearing focused on emissions from power plants. Mr. Jeffords, whose bill would rein in power-plant emissions of four problem-causing gases said it was wisest to address all four of the gases at once. But Mrs. Whitman, advocating the administration's three-pollutant approach, said it would be more prudent to move now to tighten restrictions on three undisputed public health problems -- nitrogen oxide, sulfur dioxide and mercury -- while deferring action on carbon dioxide until its role in global warming was better understood.''It would be a shame to deny people an important public health goal while we await consensus on carbon dioxide emissions,'' she said.

In 1969 President Nixon renounced the development or use of biological weapons. It was an act of enlightened self-interest. He understood that the wealth and power of the United States could not protect us from weapons that are cheap to make and terrifyingly deadly, so safety lay in persuading the world to eschew them. He then led the way to a 1972 treaty banning the development, production or possession of biological weapons. This week President Bush wiped out eight years of effort on a protocol to enforce the 1972 treaty. At a negotiating session in Geneva, the American delegate rejected a draft text that all others had accepted. The Bush administration could have called for further negotiations to improve the draft protocol. But the U.S. negotiator, Donald A. Mahley, said the administration did not think it could be fixed. That effectively killed the project. The protocol called for limited international inspection of sites suspected of involvement in biological weaponry. The Bush administration made two arguments against it: that the system would not be effective, and that it would give foreigners too much access to U.S. bio-defense installations and pharmaceutical plants. The second argument sent a dangerous signal to the rest of the world -- that despite American ratification of the 1972 treaty there are still people in the U.S. Defense Department working on ideas for biological warfare. That can only encourage others to think about new biological weapons. Administration officials told correspondents that they were looking for other ways to strengthen the 1972 treaty. One idea they mentioned was to toughen export controls on the sale of sophisticated germ-producing equipment. But experts dismissed that notion as laughable, because toxins arise in nature and can be produced without sophisticated equipment. In any event, there is no sign that the Bush administration is actually working on alternatives in a serious way. The attempt to make sure that the biological genie stays in the bottle is essentially dead for now. Without U.S. participation, nothing meaningful can happen. That he is working on a better way of accomplishing the objective after denouncing an international agreement has become a familiar claim from Mr. Bush. He took exactly that line after rejecting the Kyoto agreement on global warming.''Our nation will come up with a strategy,'' Mr. Bush said on the global warming issue last week. ''We're in the process of developing one. I can't be any more sincere than I have been in saying that we need to reduce greenhouse gases, and we'll work on a plan to do so.''But in fact alternative ways of dealing with global warming are not under active study at the higher reaches of the Bush administration. Reports from Washington say there is no pressure from the top for urgent action. Mr. Bush's position against the biological warfare protocol was familiar in another respect. Once again, under his presidency, the United States was all alone on a global issue. So it was, also, last week on an effort to negotiate limits on small-arms sales that feed civil wars and terrorism. On the Kyoto treaty, The New York Times headline nicely summed it up: ''178 Nations Reach a Climate Accord; U.S. Only Looks On.''Underlying Mr. Bush's response on these matters there is a failure of vision. He takes a parochial view, driven by ideology and a narrow sense of where American interests lie. But in today's close-knit world our interests cannot be so easily separated from global needs. Thus on global warming Mr. Bush says that he cannot accept controls that might burden the American economy. But it is the very nature of the problem that it cannot be solved unless the most productive economies reorder their use of energy and their emission of greenhouse gasses. An economy free of measures to reduce warming effects will not give us much joy, decades from now, if New York and Boston are under water. On biological weapons, similarly, parochial interests of low-level Defense Department and pharmaceutical company officials were allowed to make the running. (Nor, to be fair, did President Clinton provide high-level leadership on the issue.) On sales of small arms, the Bush administration simply bowed to the National Rifle Association. There was no broader vision of our interests in a world less beset by AK-47's and their ilk.''Where there is no vision,'' the Bible says, ''the people perish.'' Perhaps literally. Abroad at Home

The Bush administration wants Congress to collapse several of the most contentious air pollution control programs into a more flexible and less intrusive systemThe Bush administration wants Congress to collapse several of the most contentious air pollution control programs into a more flexible and less intrusive system strongly favored by leading electric utilities. The proposal is the clearest indication to date that the administration favors overhauling the Clean Air Act in ways that would answer the complaints of utilities that the agency's rules tie them up in paperwork and make them reluctant to invest in new power plants needed to provide electricity to consumers and businesses. In trying to revise one of the core environmental statutes, last revised in 1990, the administration would set in motion a protracted and politically charged battle in Congress. Unlike some of the Bush administration's  moves to reverse environmental regulations adopted by the Clinton administration, any changes to the Clean Air Act would require legislative approval. Environmental groups say they fear that the plan to simplify regulations and enforcement procedures could undercut measures intended to reduce haze in national parks, cut down on interstate transmission of smog-causing pollutants and minimize health risks to people who live close to power plants. Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said today that her staff was drafting a new approach to controlling emissions that would set nationwide caps on three major pollutants and allow utilities to trade pollution credits, much as they already do for sulfur dioxide emissions that produce acid rain. She said the trading system could replace five separate enforcement programs that regulate emissions on a plant-by-plant basis. One of those enforcement programs, known as new source review, compels utilities to install modern pollution controls when they build a new power plant or significantly expand or upgrade one already in use. Utilities have lobbied aggressively to have new source review scaled back or eliminated, and Mrs. Whitman's comments were the first indication that, at least for utilities, the administration would prefer to end the program altogether. Mrs. Whitman's new plan would also replace established programs that seek to improve visibility in national parks and to force individual utilities to reduce nitrogen oxide emissions that cross state lines.''We think we can produce a system that will result in cleaner air, but also make enforcement much more efficient,'' Mrs. Whitman said in an interview today. ''I think people will be surprised at what we can get done.''Mrs. Whitman first outlined the new plan when responding to questions at a Congressional hearing on Thursday. She has offered only a sketch of the plan, saying it will be presented formally in September. The proposal raised a number of questions among lawmakers, environmentalists and industry groups. The idea of replacing plant-by-plant enforcement with a national trading system is popular among industry groups and acceptable to some environmentalists, though people on both sides argue about which pollutants should be capped and at what level, debates that could take months or years to resolve. Senator James M. Jeffords, a Vermont independent, has introduced legislation that would set relatively stringent national caps on four major pollutants: nitrogen oxide, the main component of smog; sulfur dioxide; mercury, a toxic health hazard; and carbon dioxide, which many scientists say causes global warming. Mrs. Whitman favors a plan that would cap three pollutants, excluding carbon dioxide. The Bush administration has rejected the Kyoto Protocol to control global warming and backtracked on a campaign commitment to impose limits on carbon dioxide emissions. Environmentalists say that the new plan raises concerns because it would end successful enforcement programs without any guarantee that the new trading scheme would have the same effectiveness in cleaning up the air.''We have a real fear that they will try to spin this as a major step forward when it's really a step backward,'' said Frank O'Donnell of the Clean Air Trust, an environmental group. For utilities, especially those that own heavily polluting coal-fired power plants, the plan could amount to a major victory. Coal-using utilities were among the most generous donors to Republicans and Democrats in the last election, and they have pushed hard to shape elements of the Bush administration's approach to energy and the environment.''The notion of providing a new framework that would replace the command and control permitting nightmare would be an enormous step forward,'' said C. Boyden Gray, a White House official in the administration of Mr. Bush's father who now represents several major utilities. ''It sounds like the E.P.A. is trending in the right direction.''Eliminating new source review on utilities would not exempt other polluting industries from its requirements, Mrs. Whitman said today. Refineries, paper plants and chemical companies also must install new pollution controls when they significantly modify their plants.

During the presidential campaign, George W. Bush often said that a country as powerful as the United States should be humble in its relations with other nations. That was good advice, but since taking office Mr. Bush has shown a surprising disdain for the kinds of treaties and international agreements that set the tone for America's engagement with the world and that have figured prominently in Washington's foreign policy for most of the years since World War II. The administration's hostile attitude communicates a sense of arrogance and contempt for international cooperation that ill serves American interests. This page favors preservation or adoption of the treaties that the Bush administration opposes. But we recognize that in the case of recently negotiated accords, any new administration has a right to reconsider draft agreements endorsed by its predecessor and to propose revisions more in keeping with its own philosophy. Washington clearly has an obligation to make sure that international agreements do not undermine American security. But unless a treaty is fatally flawed, Washington should not abruptly walk away from the agreement. The more responsible answer is to work with other countries to modify the accord. As the world's strongest economic and military power, the United States has a compelling interest in helping to expand and shape international law on matters from arms control to the environment to criminal accountability. Mighty as it is, Washington cannot expect to lead the way to a less dangerous, more law-abiding and environmentally sustainable world from the sidelines. The administration's record in this regard is dismal. In January, even before Mr. Bush took office, his spokesmen declared that he would not seek Senate ratification of the treaty creating the International Criminal Court. In March, the White House announced that the United States was withdrawing from the Kyoto Protocol on global warming. In May, Mr. Bush made clear he was ready to set aside the constraints of the Antiballistic Missile Treaty in order to test and build missile defenses. Earlier this month, American delegates insisted on diluting a United Nations agreement to reduce illegal trafficking in small arms. Last week, Washington pulled out of long-running efforts to negotiate enforcement provisions for the convention banning biological weapons. Meanwhile, the administration has indefinitely deferred seeking Senate ratification of the 1996 nuclear test ban treaty and the 1993 nuclear weapons reduction treaty with Russia negotiated by Mr. Bush's father. The flaws in imperfect treaties can generally be fixed, whether through further negotiations or in the Senate ratification process. Last week, representatives of nearly 180 countries met in Bonn to refine the Kyoto Protocol. Important changes were made that addressed previous American complaints. But instead of engaging in serious negotiations in Bonn, Washington's representative was instructed to stand aside. The administration has also so far ignored a useful opportunity to address many of the objections it has raised to the nuclear test ban treaty. Early this year, Gen. John Shalikashvili, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, proposed steps that Washington could take on its own to strengthen verification of other countries' compliance with the ban and assure that America's own stockpile of nuclear warheads remained reliable in the absence of testing. Yet the White House has shown no interest in the Shalikashvili recommendations. The Bush administration's negative approach has all but scuttled efforts to enforce the global biological weapons ban. Unanimous agreement is needed to produce a new draft accord. Other countries are moving ahead with the Kyoto Protocol, but efforts to slow global warming will be badly weakened by the refusal of the world's biggest emitter of greenhouse gases to participate. The future of the ABM treaty remains in doubt. This is not a productive role for the world's leading country and the architect of much of the international law created over the last half-century. Contempt for the concerns of other countries will only erode American influence.

I needed a break from politics. Just a short spell on the West Coast, soaking up some plastic culture and Botox glamour. No thoughts of Washington at all. No cravings for Rummy. No achings for Ashcroft. It was so relaxing on the Pacific, I even decided to play hooky Friday and go to the first show of ''Planet of the Apes.'' My column was due in a few hours, but the future was written in pink neon. Anything seemed possible. I settled in with my popcorn as Mark Wahlberg's astronaut jumped in his Delta pod and shot into space, calling out ''Never send a monkey to do a man's job.'' He is propelled through time and space and crash lands on the Planet of the Apes. As Mark ran around the jungle chased by snarling simians, I began feeling anxious. Apetown seemed strangely, disturbingly familiar: evolution hurtling backward. Progress in reverse. An arrogant determination to trash the compacts governing humans.''Do-gooders,'' one monkey sniffs. ''Who needs 'em?''When Tim Roth as the human-hating chimpanzee army general announced ''Extremism in defense of apes is no vice,'' I suddenly got a creepy feeling that I had been there. Was Apetown Washington? Was the Planet of the Apes the Bush White House? Hmmmm, so W. is President Primate. This was not only a Tim Burton fantasy, it was America's scariest reality show. W.'s second trip to Europe reinforced his hollow hubris. He gladhanded the European leaders even as he thumbed his nose at their treaties.''I know what I believe,'' he said as he visited the Roman Forum, ''and I believe what I believe is right.''Like the monkey planet, Washington looks more and more menacing and antediluvian, with the Bushies beating their chests and growling. In 2000, America seemed to be moving along briskly into the future, cooperating with the rest of the world on international issues, trying to clean up the environment and keep the threat of nuclear war tamped down. Then the retread Bush crowd swept in and flung us into the same sort of time warp that swallowed Mark Wahlberg. The president is plunging ahead or behind with his technologically suspect Star Wars defense system, intending to vitiate the ABM treaty and putting China and Russia on edge and into a closer alliance. He pressed forward or backward last week with his plan to kill Kyoto, turning America into the haughty sole holdout as 178 other nations agreed to implement the treaty to fight global warming -- as usual, offering no alternative approach. Playing to its favorite audience of big business and gun owners, the administration last week blew off a U.N. plan to enforce an international ban on biological weapons and recently pressured the U.N. to weaken a pact to stem the illegal flow of small arms, from handguns to shoulder-launched rockets. The administration has no interest in the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, banning all nuclear test explosions, and is expected to reject the treaty banning land mines. W. and his Gerald Ford-era warlords -- befogged in a cloud of nuclear waste, carbon dioxide, arsenic and coal dust -- never meet an old idea they don't like. Even some hidebound Republicans in Congress find the Bush White House too far down on the evolutionary scale. On Thursday, senators from both parties upbraided E.P.A. administrator Christie Whitman, and said that if the Bushies refused to act on climate change, they would take matters into their own hands and come up with their own plan. And on Friday, the House, with some Republicans going against the president, voted to prevent the Bush administration from easing rules on the levels of arsenic in drinking water. There was even talk last week that the White House might pull out of a U.N. conference on racism. During the campaign, W. wouldn't come out firmly in favor of teaching evolution over creationism. That should have been our clue that he's unwilling to evolve. He is so mired in the past, he almost seems antagonistic toward the future. Without giving away the ending of the new version of the classic collision-of-species movie, I can tell you there's a chilling scene set in Washington. It shows what can happen when the guys in charge monkey around in the wrong direction. Liberties

Surprising even themselves, 178 countries ended a marathon bargaining session in Bonn with agreement on the rules of the Kyoto Protocol, the first climate treaty requiring industrial powers to cut emissions of gases linked to global warming. President Bush kept the U.S., the biggest source of such gases, on the sidelines, saying the treaty was unfair and costly. He continued to decline to say when he might propose another approach. The inaction seems to have goaded Congress, where both Democratic and Republican aides say that measures calling for cuts in emissions are likely to pass this year. Andrew C. Revkin

Beyond the normal sniping that always goes on between Europe and America, there is today a real disagreement about what it means for America to be the world's leader. The Bush team thinks being the world's only superpower means never having to say you're sorry, and the Europeans think being the world's most powerful democracy means always having to ask permission. For the Bush team, being the world's leader means we should be able to do whatever we want when we want, unconstrained by treaties or multilateral agreements that might limit our consumption of resources (Kyoto) or our military power (the ABM and nuclear testing treaties and the biological weapons convention) or our insane gun laws (the U.N. pact on small arms). For Europe, the more economically and militarily dominant America becomes, the more people here feel that it should be answerable not only to the American people but to the rest of the world.''The whole point of having the kind of power America has today is that you're accountable to people outside your country, because what you do affects people outside your country,'' remarked Heather Grabbe, director of research for the Institute for European Reform in London. ''Bush can't just get away with saying, 'Well, the American people elected me and they don't like Kyoto, so tough,' and that settles the matter. Because you're so dominant, you have to be the example-setter.''Last week saw Europe and Japan reach agreement, without the U.S., on a new basis for implementing the Kyoto treaty on climate change, which the Bush team has trashed, arguing that it requires too deep a cut in U.S. energy usage. Then a few days later the Bush team rejected a stronger interpretation of the accord banning biological weapons, because the new inspection-verification provisions -- which we had advocated -- might expose the industrial secrets of U.S. companies. ''For six years everybody talks of the importance of verification,'' wrote London's normally pro-U.S. paper The Independent. ''And then, America discovers that its facilities, too, would have to be verified. The brazen nerve! America might be treated as though it were just another country! Mr. Bush's America seems in danger of convincing itself that it can force everybody to make concessions, while itself remaining impervious to change.''America is referred to as a ''rogue state'' in Europe now as often as Iraq. Some of this is silly. But some is not. U.S. foreign policy has always been about creating a world that operates by rules, not by force, because ideally we would like to see the world operate as much as possible like our own country. Many people around the world look to America as the ultimate upholder of rules and norms. But the message we have been sending to the world lately is that we do not believe in rules, we believe in power -- and we've got it and you don't. For now, we can always get our way, but when we elevate power in that way we invite others to challenge us on the same basis. That is the meaning of the recent China-Russia cooperation treaty. After last week's deal between Europe and Japan on Kyoto, the E.U.'s environment commissioner, Margot Wallstrom, declared: ''We've managed to rescue the Kyoto Protocol. I think something has changed today in the balance of power between the U.S. and the E.U.''It would be one thing if the Bush team said, ''We don't like Kyoto, or the bio-weapons treaty, but we have alternative approaches that can accomplish nearly the same ends with slightly different means.'' But they have offered nothing of the kind, because they spent all their time out of power trashing these agreements, not thinking of creative alternatives. Frankly, I don't care if we're unpopular. Sometimes countries have to assert their will to protect their interests. The same Europeans who now complain about our flouting of rules are the ones who love to sell arms to Iraq or Iran. But having said that, America is different -- or at least it should be -- because we have a special role in the world. The key to global stability today is that the world's only superpower be ready to pay a disproportionate share to maintain global institutions and norms -- because, ultimately, we will be the biggest beneficiary of such a world and because, if we aren't interested in rules, who will be? Foreign Affairs

Much is being made of the Bush administration's exclusion of the United States from an agreement reached by 178 countries last week to move forward on combating global warming. But both those who deplore the Bush administration's snub and those who agree with the president that America couldn't afford to join in are losing sight of the long view. To really head off climate change, the world must eventually make even larger (much larger) cuts in its emissions of greenhouses gases than those envisioned in the Kyoto agreement and its refinements in Bonn. But we have some time. The Kyoto protocol calls for reductions from 2008 to 2012. In fact, the large reductions can wait for another decade or two after that. But to make these cuts in time, we must begin now to engage private business and private inventiveness in attacking the problem. The world's success in preventing damaging climate change will depend on how it gets its energy over coming decades, as conventional oil and gas grow scarcer. If most new energy comes from burning coal or new fossil fuels, like oil sands, by 2100 the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere will be higher than it has been for 50 million years. If most of the energy comes from nonfossil sources, or if new technologies allow us to burn fossil fuels without emitting carbon dioxide, then climate change can at least be greatly slowed and perhaps eventually stabilized. Relative to this vast choice looming a few decades ahead, squabbles over the stringency of the Kyoto emission targets are foolish. We have a model that can help. The 1987 Montreal protocol on the ozone layer, now endorsed by 177 countries, is an example that is being overlooked. Its success did not come from its initial 1987 controls on the use of chemicals that deplete ozone, but from its adaptability in achieving its goals. The flexibility of the Montreal protocol made it easier for industry and governments to accept firm goals in the first place, making it possible for the world to move in a common direction. The international controls under the protocol have been revised five times, each time with the advice of independent experts from many nations, on the applicability of new developments in science and technology. Letting regulations adapt to changing technical possibilities promoted an intense effort by private industry to reduce the use of ozone-depleting chemicals and develop substitutes for use in products like air conditioners and refrigerators. By participating, industries were better able to solve the technical problems they faced in meeting existing and anticipated regulations, and they could spot commercial opportunities in the phasing out of the old chemicals. Since 1987 the use of ozone-depleting chemicals has declined 90 percent worldwide at modest cost, an achievement that once seemed unthinkable. The Montreal lesson has not been learned well; political forces remain polarized on climate policy. The paralyzing deadlock grows ever more perilous as new scientific reports continue to strengthen the case that we are changing the global climate, that changes are likely to accelerate and that the effects, in all countries, will be serious. We must break the impasse. First, the nations of the world must make some -- any -- move to curb emissions, some law or rule that will exact a cost on power generators and other industries when they emit greenhouse gases, even if only a modest cost at first. Strategically, this would show the world is moving in a new direction, and the additional cost would be an incentive to develop new, cleaner technology. Implementing the Kyoto protocol without American participation can help if it means adoption of real controls by other nations. But international leaders must also keep trying to bring the United States on board. Soon, because of the dominance of the American economy, American participation will be necessary to make global financial penalties and incentives work. Second, the world must establish a process to identify and evaluate new technologies to reduce emissions (like ways of separating the carbon from fossil fuels and putting it underground) and linking periodic review and adaptation of rules to these advances. It is vital that the energy industry and other businesses be serious participants in this process. This will require some combination of providing incentives to needed changes and removing barriers to innovation. The failure of the Bush administration to participate in Kyoto does not  mean that significant progress cannot be made by other nations. Eventually, domestic politics here may well force the administration to become engaged on this issue. In the meantime, providing incentives for innovations from private industry will help make a response to global warming economically more palatable in the future. Edward A. Parson, associate professor of public policy in the John F. Kennedy School at Harvard, was a consultant in the White House Science Office under Bill Clinton.

Australia's friendship with the United States is long and deep. Indeed, perhaps only such a strong ally would have the pull to persuade two of the most powerful people in the Bush administration, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, to fly to the bottom of the world and then sit next to each other on the same stage to face reporters. The occasion was an annual joint meeting on defense and diplomacy. Secretary Powell had just come from China, where he noticeably avoided calling Beijing a ''strategic competitor,'' a phrase concocted during the Bush election campaign to signify toughness. (He stopped using it months ago.) But Mr. Rumsfeld, considered more of a hawk on China, was asked at the news conference whether he still called China a ''strategic competitor.''Mr. Rumsfeld, not known for his love of the press, bristled a bit, then replied: ''I don't recall using that phrase. I've heard the last administration talk about strategic partners, and then I've heard others say strategic competitors. I've always, I think, characterized it as a relationship that is multifaceted and is evolving. And I haven't put any Rumsfeldian code words on it.''Reflecting further, he parried, ''Are you trying to find some daylight between Colin and me?''That was too much to resist for an American reporter, who asked, ''Do you always agree on everything?''Mr. Rumsfeld shot back, ''Except for those few cases where Colin is still learning.''Upstaged!When such senior American officials land in Australia they generally receive top news billing, a reflection of the significance this thinly populated nation places on its military alliance with the faraway United States. But Secretary Powell and Mr. Rumsfeld were upstaged by something even more important to this sports-obsessed country. The Australian team at the world swimming championships in Japan won 13 gold medals and smashed world records. Huge front-page photographs of the swimmers relegated the American visitors to the inside pages. A Land of YeasayersWhy all the attention to Australia? Especially by Mr. Rumsfeld, who does not care to travel much and who dashed out here on a small jet and stayed for little more than 24 hours before returning to Washington. While the Bush administration is criticized in Europe and Asia for its missile defense policy and its rejection of the Kyoto protocol on global warming, the conservative Australian government of Prime Minister John Howard agrees wholeheartedly with the White House on both. The two sides found another mutual interest: renewing ties with the Indonesian military. Legislation tying American military assistance to Indonesia to the its army's human rights record limits what the United States can do. But American officials encouraged Australia, which has similar concerns, to take the lead in upgrading contacts. ''I find the position of the United States, with respect to Indonesia, is, as far as I can tell, identical to that of Australia,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. American aides who accompanied Mr. Rumsfeld and Secretary Powell, find themselves hectored in other parts of the world. They seemed to appreciate being appreciated. The Australians do disagree over proposals for enforcing the 1972 biological weapons convention, which the Bush administration rejects as flawed. Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said that having an enforcement mechanism, though imperfect, was preferable to none at all. But the Australians, not wanting to sour the atmosphere, refrained from making a big deal of the issue. Dinner With Real PeopleThe day in Canberra was the last leg of an odyssey that took Secretary Powell to four Asian countries in six days. In Beijing, his hosts let him off the hook on a formal dinner, which the secretary always tries to avoid. Instead, he went out to one of the large eating halls where ordinary Chinese take their families, accompanied the new American ambassador, Clark T. Randt. Asked what the reaction was when he entered, Secretary Powell said people glanced up and then went back to their noodles. The last meal of the trip was tonight at the prime minister's lodge.  Mr. Downer arranged a special chariot. A crimson 1980 Volvo 262 awaited the secretary as he walked out his hotel door. He is passionate about Volvos -- his hobby is fixing up old models -- and he immediately lifted the hood to inspect the engine. He then got in the driver's seat -- on the right hand side -- and chugged off, proclaiming the car the ''most magnificent Volvo ever made.''Reporter's Notebook

In his first six months in office, President Bush has abandoned a treaty on fighting global warming, rejected protocols enforcing a ban on germ warfare, demanded amendments to an accord on illegal sales of small arms, threatened to skip an international conference on racism and vowed to withdraw from a landmark pact limiting ballistic missile defenses. The reaction from Berlin to Beijing has been one of concern that an American president who walks away from so many treaties might be one who wants to walk away from the world -- or, at the least, one who will demand that the world live by terms dictated by America alone. Mr. Bush's advisers deny that he is unilateralist or isolationist, or that his administration has a blanket disdain for group action as a way of conducting world affairs. They simply view treaties as a steam-engine-age tool whose usefulness this deep into the nuclear era will be judged one issue at a time, one negotiation at a time, one summit meeting at a time.''What you're going to get from this administration is ' la carte multilateralism,' '' said Richard Haass, the State Department's director of policy planning, coining a name for the administration's approach. At a gathering last week at the Nixon Center here, he added, ''We'll look at each agreement and make a decision, rather than come out with a broad-based approach.''So far, the administration has displayed unanimity in formulating international policy, with only a few differences so pronounced as to become public. One concerns the global warming treaty. While Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told foreign leaders earlier this month that the United States would have a counterproposal to the Kyoto accord in time for an October conference in Morocco, Condoleezza Rice, the president's national security adviser, said last weekend that the administration had no such deadline. In general, Mr. Bush and his most senior advisers say they are applying what they see as a hard-headed assessment of treaties  case by case, and based on America's interests. President Clinton, in contrast, embraced arms control negotiations. He sent his envoys to Moscow to seek a grand bargain with Russia that would defend the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty by amending it, coupled with a new round of formal talks on strategic arms reductions. He also signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and sent it to the Senate, where it languishes today. It should be noted, however,  that President Bush is criticized for rejecting two agreements that even Mr. Clinton did not wholeheartedly advocate: the international ban on land mines and an accord establishing a permanent International Criminal Court. Under President Bush, there will be no rush to lengthy negotiations simply on the premise of history that talk is good. Treaties, Mr. Bush and his advisers say, will be adopted when they clearly carve American interests in stone. In some areas of arms control, the administration believes that treaties bind only the honest but give cover to the cheat. And on nuclear arms control in particular, treaties move too slowly to manage a dynamic yet still uncertain relationship with Russia at a time when historic reductions in arsenals are conceivable, officials say.''You'll not find a more internationalist administration than this administration,'' Ms. Rice said Sunday on CBS's ''Face the Nation.'' She criticized policies under which ''internationalism somehow becomes defined as signing on to bad treaties just to say that you've signed a treaty.''But by knocking off several of the hard-earned, high-profile treaties on arms control and the environment, Mr. Bush has been subjected to outrage from some of America's closest friends -- who wonder what will replace a world ordered by treaties -- as well as its adversaries who see arrogance in Mr. Bush's actions. The British, for example, consider themselves America's greatest friends in Europe and often find themselves defending United States behavior to dubious Continentals. But their task has been complicated by what many perceive as American unilateralism and finger-in-the-eye confrontation in place of diplomacy. Any missile shield will have to use British radar and tracking facilities, and Labor politicians have already threatened Prime Minister Tony Blair with the kinds of protests that were widespread in Britain during the years when American missiles were based there. As for the environment, Britain is very green politically and the press denounced Mr. Bush after he rejected the Kyoto agreement on global warming; The Independent published a front page picture of him under the caption ''Polluter of the World.''There was a notable change in feeling across Europe last week, after the Group of 8 conference in Genoa, that Mr. Bush was now interested in reconciliation with leaders who had been put off by some of his early decisions. Even so, writing in the German weekly Die Zeit, Theo Sommer compared Mr. Bush's style to that of Andrei A. Gromyko, the grizzled Soviet foreign minister known to a generation of diplomats as ''Grim Grom'' and ''Mr. Nyet.''''The president says 'no,' not grimly, but with a smile. Yet he shows his teeth in doing so,'' Mr. Sommer wrote. ''He does not concede, he does not give up, he does not surrender. He offers everyone consultations, partners and rivals alike; he promises to keep in touch; that is why, he assures everyone, you cannot talk about an American go-it-alone attitude. Yet the conversations are aimed at conversion, not compromise.''In China, the president's actions have served to cement in the public mind their government's characterization of the United States as hegemonic. The word, featured prominently and frequently in state newspaper headlines, is among the first adjectives that come to mind for everyone from university students to migrant laborers when asked what they think of America.''After Bush came into power, the most noteworthy aspect of his administration's foreign policy is unilateralism,'' Yan Xuetong, director of the Institute of International Studies at Qinghua University, wrote last week in the People's Daily. ''It neither negotiates with the principal countries whose interests are involved nor exchanges views with its allies on international affairs.''Regardless of a presidential candidate's politics and personal desires, the realities of global responsibility constrain any American president -- something that each new occupant of the White House learns after the quadrennial irritation of new policy reviews ordered up after Inauguration Day. Just as few war plans survive the first engagement with the enemy, so do presidential perceptions adapt to the first handshake with a rival and a first tour of the world aboard Air Force One. President Bush entered office vowing to speedily scrap the ABM Treaty, regardless of Russian objections. There is little doubt that Mr. Bush still plans to invoke the six-month notice to legally withdraw from the pact. But after he met President Vladimir V. Putin, and said he had looked into the Russian's soul, Mr. Bush instructed his national security team to begin accelerated discussions to create a new security framework with Russia as a partner.''Our critics and the people who love the ABM Treaty probably have trouble accepting the idea that that is a framework of mutual enmity, but that's what it reflects,'' Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy secretary of defense, said in an interview. The administration's goal is ''to replace that framework of dealing with each other as potential adversaries with a framework of dealing with one another as potential allies -- and if that's too strong a word, perhaps it is at least countries with major security interests in common,'' he said. Indeed, the administration points to a list of nonproliferation treaties it supports as essential to United States and global security, including the Missile Technology Control Regime, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Nonproliferation Treaty. But the administration faces a new challenge on its nonproliferation policy, deliberating over the last months how to explain its stance on the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty ahead of a conference this September at the United Nations in New York. The nation's closest allies will be exhorting holdout states to move forward on the test ban, yet the administration has made it clear that it is content to have the treaty remain frozen in the Senate. Japan's foreign minister, Makiko Tanaka, urged the administration again just last week to push for ratification, and urged Mr. Bush to send a high-level delegation to the meeting in September. So far, the administration has not been moved. Mr. Bush did undergo a transformation on the nation's obligations to peacekeeping missions in Bosnia and Kosovo: although he criticized such deployments during the campaign, he has since determined that tending to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, perhaps the most successful multilateral alliance in history, is worth keeping American combat boots deep in the Balkan mud -- at least as long as the allies do, too. The administration is striking back at Congress, which always has members exhibiting a strong isolationist -- or at least independent -- streak, for what Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, described today as acts of unilateralism and attempts to hobble the president's global role. He attacked those who support a union-led campaign to thwart tenets of the North American Free Trade Agreement and keep Mexican truckers off American highways, and who also are hampering the president in trade negotiations; most of them are Democrats.''I think it's a worrisome indication that there's some people on the Hill who are pursuing an isolationist path,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''And the president would like to stop that from happening.''

With President Bush continuing to oppose international or domestic restrictions on gases linked to global warming, among the losers are energy companies that favor government action and have already spent millions on voluntary efforts to cut emissions. Given little credence by the White House despite large expenditures on lobbying and longstanding ties to administration officials, these companies are shifting their focus to Congress, where several bills that would impose emissions restrictions are being debated or prepared. But in that effort, the companies face formidable opposition from other energy concerns and trade groups that are fighting against any limits.''There's an enormous amount of lobbying going on,'' said Rob Long, vice president for government affairs at the National Mining Association. ''It's a three-ring circus.''Among the companies that want the United States to embrace some form of greenhouse-gas limits are oil producers including the Royal Dutch/Shell Group and BP, as well as power-generating companies like Cinergy, AEP and Entergy, all of which have moved to reduce their own emissions. Another company holding this view is the Enron Corporation of Houston, whose chairman is Mr. Bush's friend Kenneth L. Lay. Enron was the largest contributor among energy companies last year to the Republican Party. These companies, which include some of the world's biggest producers and users of fossil fuels, have concluded that limits on carbon dioxide and other greenhouse, or heat-trapping, gases are inevitable. They say that by packaging reductions in greenhouse gas emissions with other environmental measures, like cutting other power plant emissions, they could win concessions on other pollution rules. And to plan long-term investments, they want the predictability that comes from quick adoption of clear rules, although more flexible ones than those agreed to in Bonn a week ago by 178 countries that have accepted the Kyoto Protocol, the worldwide climate agreement that President Bush rejects. Most of these businesses share Mr. Bush's view that the Kyoto agreement could hurt the United States economy and that it unfairly requires emissions reductions only of big industrial nations. But many officials of these companies said Mr. Bush had blundered by rejecting the agreement outright instead of trying to repair it.''What businesses want is policy certainty,'' an environmental expert for a large international energy company said. ''Bush has injected only turbulence.''For all their wealth, power and influence, though, these companies say they have been cut out of discussions at the White House. The only ideas that have risen to the highest levels there are those of companies staunchly opposing limits on emissions, according to lobbyists, government officials and executives. The Bush administration denied last night that it was excluding any options or ideas in trying to develop an approach to global warming. A White House spokeswoman, Claire E. Buchan, said: ''We are taking this issue very seriously. We're listening to constituencies who represent all perspectives.''In contrast to executives of companies seeking limits on the gases, people representing companies opposed to restrictions, including Exxon Mobil and many coal companies, said they thought that their message was resonating. Fredrick D. Palmer, executive vice president for legal and external affairs at Peabody Energy of St. Louis, one of the world's largest coal producers, said it was not really necessary to lobby the Bush administration on the issue, because Big Coal's interests and the administration's views were in sync from the start.''We don't need to be talking to the White House to know what they want,'' Mr. Palmer said. ''I understand the importance of fossil fuels to the American people. Dick Cheney understands that. The president understands that.''For the moment, the two corporate camps -- which have dominated the discussion, with environmental groups largely locked out -- have turned to Congress, where an array of influential members from both parties is hoping to seize the initiative in policy making. Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont, the independent and new chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee, has said that global warming is his top priority. Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, has joined with Senator Robert C. Byrd, the veteran Democrat from West Virginia, a leading coal-producing state, in introducing a bill aimed at controlling emissions. Mr. Stevens has recently expressed deep concern about the apparently growing damage in his state from climate change. The energy industry now is focusing its efforts on the energy legislation moving through the House. But company executives and lobbyists are also meeting with members of Congress and administration officials to shape the discussion over a variety of impending emissions measures and proposed changes in regulations. In mid-August, the Environmental Protection Agency is expected to make recommendations to the White House on how to reduce releases of nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide and mercury from power plants. And Mr. Jeffords plans to hold meetings with industry, environmentalists and agency officials in September to seek a consensus on a bill to control the three pollutants, along with ways to limit carbon dioxide, the dominant greenhouse gas. The one thing so far that unifies the energy industry is its opposition to the Jeffords emissions bill in its current form, mainly because it stipulates that old power plants install the latest technology to clean up emissions within five years. Power producers say that the timetable is too stringent and that such a change would disproportionately hurt the Midwest, where most of the power is generated by older coal-fired plants that are targets of the legislation. Beyond that, the industry separates into distinct camps. For energy companies willing to accept some limits on warming gases, one goal is to firm up a market for tradeable credits earned by companies that make sharp cuts in emissions or plant or protect forests, which absorb carbon dioxide. For such credits to have value, a limit on emissions must exist, the company officials say. Aware of corporate resistance to mandatory limits, some energy industry executives and lobbyists have proposed that the government sponsor a voluntary program to reduce emissions. Once enrolled, companies would have to meet mandatory goals on reductions of greenhouse gases.''We haven't said there must be mandatory caps on CO2,'' said Jeffrey Keeler, director of environmental strategies at Enron. ''But it's been proven that voluntary programs don't work well; that's why we are where we are today. We can have limits from the top down and not endanger the economy.''Whether the Bush administration will accept even voluntary limits remains to be seen. And later this year, the White House will again be the focus of policy making. Businesses that share the view Mr. Bush expressed in March, when he rejected any binding limits on the warming gases, whether in a global accord or federal legislation, say they are confident that there will be no big shifts. For example, Mr. Long, the mining association official, said he was perplexed by those companies that want to reduce carbon dioxide, which his group and its allies do not see as a pollutant or a threat to the environment.''I think some of this is the hangover from the Clintonian era, when some of these emissions changes seemed inevitable,'' he said. ''And I think some people got locked into that mind-set. I think the world changed in January. It can't have escaped their notice that the new president won't support constraints on CO2 .''One of the staunchest foes of limits on carbon dioxide is the Southern Company of Atlanta, whose nuclear and coal-fired plants span Georgia, Florida, Alabama and Mississippi, and whose donations to the Republican Party last year were second only to Enron's. The company recently enlisted Haley Barbour, a former chairman of the Republican National Committee, as a lobbyist. Mr. Barbour mainly works to loosen enforcement of environmental regulations affecting utilities, though other Washington lobbyists said that he had also argued against action on reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Mr. Barbour did not return phone calls yesterday seeking comment. Power companies trying to find a way to reduce carbon dioxide emissions think they have greater sway with Congress than they have with the White House. ''The closer we get to midterm elections,'' a utility executive said, ''both sides of the Hill will feel a high degree of vulnerability on environmental issues, and some will retreat from the White House if they feel they need to.''In the meantime, opponents of emissions limits are not assuming that the Kyoto accord is dead, despite its having been greatly weakened by the rejection from the United States, the biggest emitter of greenhouse gases. Their lobbyists were out in force at last week's negotiations in Bonn, and they said they would keep working to defeat the international agreement, which is still subject to ratification in scores of countries. Among other things, they plan to keep pressure on the Bush administration to propose no alternatives -- particularly anything resembling a limit on greenhouse gases.''The protocol is like the Titanic,'' said Glenn Kelly, executive director of the Global Climate Coalition, which has fought against the Kyoto agreement using contributions from industries that regard gas restrictions as a threat. Eventually, he said in an interview in Bonn, the Kyoto Protocol will hit an iceberg, but that will not be the end of the matter. ''After it sinks,'' he said, ''there are still going to be lifeboats that survive to be picked up by the next ship that comes along.''

A Senate committee called on the Bush administration to develop a plan to reduce emissions and to take part in international negotiations on global warmingA Senate committee unanimously approved a nonbinding resolution today that  called on the Bush administration to develop a plan to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and to take part in international negotiations on global warming. A chief sponsor of the resolution, Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said its purpose was to make clear ''that the Bush administration's current posture of sitting on the sidelines is unacceptable.''The measure was approved, 19 to 0, as an amendment to a bill authorizing the programs of the State Department. The companion State Department bill passed by the House in May contains similar language. The resolution was carefully written so that administration supporters could feel comfortable voting for it. Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, one of President Bush's chief allies on global warming, said he voted for the measure because it endorsed the president's position that any global-warming pact should protect the economic interests of the United States and have participation by developing countries. In Bonn last week, 178 countries reached agreement on rules of the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 treaty requiring industrial powers to limit emission of gases like carbon dioxide linked to global warming. The United States, the largest producer of greenhouse gases, was alone in rejecting the treaty. President Bush called it ''fatally flawed'' because it would place no emission restrictions on developing countries and because, in his view, compliance would be so expensive it would damage the American economy. Administration officials have said they are working on a position on global warming but have refused to make a commitment to have a proposal ready for presentation at the next international meeting on the Kyoto accord in October. In Congressional testimony last week, Christie Whitman, administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said, ''We're still a long way from knowing how to solve the problem.''But especially since Democrats took control of the Senate two months ago, Congress has been aggressively challenging the president on environmental issues. While the resolution has no binding effect, lawmakers seem likely to pass one or more measures this year intended to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide. The main question is whether the restrictions will be mandatory or voluntary. The crucial paragraph of the resolution adopted today by the Foreign Relations Committee expresses the ''sense of Congress'' that the United States should take part in international negotiations on global warming and should offer a proposal at the meeting in October that protects the economic interests of the United States and requires developing countries to limit emissions. Another paragraph specifies that a Senate resolution approved, 95 to 0, in 1997 before the Kyoto accord was made final ''should not cause the United States to abandon its shared responsibility to help find a solution to the global climate change dilemma.''The 1997 resolution, sponsored by Senator Hagel and Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, expressed the view of the Senate that emission restrictions should be placed on developing countries. Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican leader, and other administration supporters have said the Byrd-Hagel resolution showed that senators from both parties were opposed to the Kyoto treaty.

Drawing clear battle lines with the White House on foreign policy, Representative Richard A. Gephardt accused the Bush administration today of an obsession with missile defense and of pursuing a unilateralist approach to world affairs that risks antagonizing Russia and undermining relations with Europe. Mr. Gephardt, the House minority leader, vowed to unite Democrats and persuade Republicans to forge a bipartisan majority in Congress to block any missile defense system that would violate the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. He also defended formal arms control negotiations as essential to maintaining the nuclear peace. On Russia, Mr. Gephardt sketched his version of a framework for new relations, one that would reject ultimatums on missile defenses and warhead reductions but never shy from complaining about Russian failures to protect press freedoms, ethnic relations and religious tolerance. Eventually, he said, the goal would be to ''extend to Russia the prospect of NATO membership.''The Missouri Democrat, widely seen as an undeclared candidate for his party's presidential nomination in 2004, recently returned from a visit to Europe and Russia, and said NATO allies ''are worried that America is on the sidelines.''''They think the Bush administration has embraced a go-it-alone policy that undermines international security, hurts our economic and environmental interests and prevents us from seizing a historic opportunity for engagement with Russia,'' he said. When Mr. Gephardt's speech, given to the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace today, is added to recent statements from three Senate Democrats -- Carl Levin of Michigan, chairman of the Armed Services Committee; Joseph R. Biden of Delaware, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee; and Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the majority leader -- a consensus party agenda on international security comes sharply into focus. While differences are inevitable, the Democrats generally unite in arguing that nuclear deterrence still works, even against Iraq and North Korea. They broadly agree that there is no need to rush deployment of missile defenses, although continued research and development, within treaty constraints, in pursuit of a limited system is a national interest. The Democrats also hold that President Bush, by rejecting important treaties, is leading Americans into a new isolationism that will weaken their ability to pursue a broad range of global interests, and that the United States should return to negotiations on global warming and stick to peacekeeping commitments. Mr. Gephardt focused his harshest criticism on the Bush administration's dealings with Moscow on arms control and missile defense. Speaking of Russia, he said: ''This is a country that is strapped financially in the most severe way. And they've got multiple thousands of warheads. How can they keep them in repair? How can they avoid accidents? Are we worried about their command and control, about something getting out of hand? So that to me is the major threat that we still face. And treating that in a sensible way is severely complicated by our obsession with going ahead with this missile defense plan, which we haven't proven can work, and we haven't developed, and that we certainly haven't worked out with the Europeans and the Russians.''The president's senior advisers say that the Bush administration will apply the standard of American national interest in determining whether to support or reject international accords. For example, in the case of the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, administration officials say, the pact would damage the American economy and harm global financial health. And on relations with Russia, the administration has stated that the ABM treaty is outdated and stands in the way of moving rapidly toward both historic reductions in arsenals and building a defense against ballistic missiles launched by an enemy -- or accidentally by Russia. Mr. Gephardt said the administration ''has ratcheted up its unilateral rhetoric,'' which he said had led to ''the largely symbolic, yet potentially destabilizing treaty between Russia and China, designed in part to counter U.S. global dominance.'' He was referring to a treaty of ''friendship and cooperation'' signed by the two countries last month. Mr. Gephardt said the president's policies had already resulted in Russian threats to place more nuclear warheads on its missiles and a Russian decision to block American efforts to strengthen international sanctions on Iraq.''These examples, I think, demonstrate a simple yet profound fact of international relations,'' he said. ''One nation, acting alone, cannot possibly build a lasting strategic framework to which all other nations submit.''After the speech, Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, tossed the unilateralist charge back at Mr. Gephardt, accusing him of working to shackle the president's authority to negotiate trade deals and saying that he and other Democrats were thwarting the tenets of the North American Free Trade Agreement by trying to keep Mexican truckers off American highways.''Given his isolationist record on Mexico, on Nafta, on free trade, the president hopes that Mr. Gephardt will pursue a more internationalist course this fall on trade promotion authority,'' Mr. Fleischer said. Mr. Gephardt had anticipated that charge in his speech, saying that in order to get a trade agreement through Congress, ''it's got to have enforceable provisions on labor and environmental matters'' and on human rights.

Two of President Bush's onetime and possibly future political rivals joined forces today to warn that the nation's isolation from a global warming pact could hurt American businesses as well as the environment and said that they wanted to guide the nation toward limits on greenhouse gases. The two, Senators John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, said the United States should set  limits on carbon dioxide emissions, much like those Mr. Bush rejected. They also said they would work with all sectors of industry to develop such a plan.''Voluntary programs unfortunately do not work,'' Mr. Lieberman said. Businesses, Mr. McCain said, ''are increasingly recognizing that purely voluntary approaches will not be enough'' to stop global warming. ''It is time to take action,'' he said. Mr. McCain's comments were an unusually explicit endorsement of controls and a break with Republican orthodoxy, although Mr. McCain  sought to underscore the political viability of his argument by citing an editorial in The Wall Street Journal that advocated the same thing. Senator Lieberman, who ran for vice president on the Democratic ticket against Mr. Bush, said, ''I have been extremely troubled by the failure of our government to engage on this crucial issue.''The joint statement, placed in the Congressional Record as the Senate left town today for the August recess, was the third sign this week of growing bipartisan sentiment in the Senate that the Bush administration erred in rejecting a global climate accord. On Wednesday, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee unanimously approved a nonbinding resolution that called on the administration to develop a plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and get involved in international negotiations. On Thursday, the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee unanimously approved a bipartisan resolution to establish a White House office dedicated to developing a national strategy on climate change within a year and to spend nearly $5 billion over the next 10 years to develop technology to control global warming. Today's comments from Senators McCain and Lieberman suggest the political power that both parties sense in the issue. The approach they called for would enforce a nationwide limit on emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases that mainstream scientists have warned are warming the earth's atmosphere. Companies that emit these gases, mainly when they burn fossil fuels, would be able to buy and sell emissions permits, an approach called ''cap-and-trade'' that reward those who find cheap ways to control pollution. Companies could also earn and trade credits for actions like growing trees, which remove carbon dioxide from the air, and could trade permits and credits internationally under the Kyoto Protocol, the agreement to fight global warming that Mr. Bush rejected. Fred Krupp, executive director of Environmental Defense, said, ''To have two senators like John McCain and Joe Lieberman joining across the aisle to say that voluntary methods haven't been enough and that they're going to work to develop a comprehensive cap-and-trade system is very significant.''Administration officials have said they are working on a position on global warming but have not made a commitment to present a proposal at the next international meeting on the subject, in October.

Perhaps no president in recent memory has invoked the phrase ''in the American interest'' so often and so early as George W. Bush. Mr. Bush's rhetoric represents a reaction, fierce among conservatives, to what they view as the fuzzy-minded, multinational foreign policy of Bill Clinton. They loathed Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's ''assertive multilateralism.'' They detested Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott's globalist vision. (''Within the next hundred years,'' Mr. Talbott once wrote, ''nationhood as we know it will be obsolete; all states will recognize a single, global authority.'') Even Democrats seemed to squirm when Al Gore offered condolences to the families of 15 American soldiers who died in Iraq ''in the service of the United Nations.''Yes, the Clinton administration had, at times, a remarkably vague and misguided understanding of the American national interest. But now President Bush could be accused of defining the national interest in the most narrow and parochial of ways. By doing so he risks exactly what his administration claims to treasure: America's leadership role in the world. Mr. Bush would do well to think back. When Ronald Reagan provoked controversy by opposing the Law of the Sea Treaty, for example, he did so because he considered it contrary to American interests, and he said this plainly. Mr. Reagan was concerned about unreasonable obstacles to the development of deep seabed mineral resources. But, as was so often the case in his foreign policy, Mr. Reagan linked American interests to the greater international good. It's a delicate balancing act, to be sure. But Mr. Reagan knew that the dividends were great for America. In the case of the Law of the Sea convention, which laid down a comprehensive system of rules for the use of oceans and their resources, he was opposed for national reasons but also on behalf of ''world demand.'' He invoked free trade, commerce and international security. Nearly a decade later, Mr. Bush's father similarly appealed to broader principles and chose multilateral cooperation as an effective, even indispensable, means toward ousting Iraq's Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. American interests were advanced. At times, President George W. Bush seems to get it. He dropped the ''national'' from national missile defense. In fact, the United States needs allied cooperation, namely critical permission from Britain and Denmark to upgrade radar stations in Britain and Greenland. Easing Russian concerns, as Mr. Bush decided to do after a rocky beginning with President Vladimir Putin, helps make the deal. But then there was Mr. Bush's almost contemptuous rejection of the Kyoto accord on global warming. Despite compelling critiques at hand, the president reached almost exclusively for small-minded America First arguments. Last weekend, national security adviser Condoleezza Rice told Bob Schieffer on CBS's ''Face the Nation'' that ''the president of the United States was not elected to sign treaties that are not in America's interest.''Indeed. But if treaties like the one aimed at banning biological weapons are not in America's interest, there's reason to believe that such agreements do not serve the interests of our allies either. Why not argue the case? After all, how does the administration expect to convince the French to forgo lucrative oil contracts with Iraq, for example, if France's own benchmark is such a narrow definition of national interest? How will Mr. Bush persuade the Germans, who are owed billions by Iran, to take a hard line with Tehran for the cause of international security? If America defines its interests too narrowly, it cedes its claim to moral leadership -- a remarkable but perishable American asset. Such a definition would also embolden other countries to define their interests in the same way. Ultimately, this would restrict American power and reduce American opportunities. Our national interests, properly understood, must embrace the principles that tie us to our liberal democratic allies. Effective leadership requires decisiveness and a common vision. The Bush administration has the first, but neglects the second at the nation's peril. Jeffrey Gedmin is a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute and executive director of the New Atlantic Initiative. Gary Schmitt is executive director of the Project for the New American Century.

The news from environmental organizations is almost always bleak. The climate is out of whack. Insidious chemicals taint food and drink. Tropical forests are disappearing. Species are perishing en masse. Industrial poisons pollute air, earth and water. Ecosystems are being stressed to the breaking point by the greedy, wasteful consumption of the Western lifestyle and its would-be imitators. So it is a surprise to meet someone who calls himself an environmentalist but who asserts that things are getting better, that the rate of human population growth is past its peak, that agriculture is sustainable and pollution is ebbing, that forests are not disappearing, that there is no wholesale destruction of plant and animal species and that even global warming is not as serious as commonly portrayed. Strange to say, the author of this happy thesis is not a steely-eyed economist at a conservative Washington think tank but a vegetarian, backpack-toting academic who was a member of Greenpeace for four years. He is Dr. Bjorn Lomborg, a 36-year-old political scientist and professor of statistics at the University of Aarhus in Denmark.  Dr. Lomborg arrived at this position, much to his own astonishment, through a journey that began in a Los Angeles bookshop in February 1997. Dr. Lomborg was leafing through an issue of Wired magazine and started reading an interview with Dr. Julian L. Simon, a University of Maryland economist who argued in several books that population was unlikely to outrun natural resources. But Dr. Simon, who died in 1998, is more widely known for his solution to the airline overbooking problem (having airlines pay passengers to take a later flight) and for a 1980 bet with Dr. Paul Ehrlich, president of Stanford University's Center for Conservation Biology. Dr. Lomborg bet that any five metals chosen by Dr. Ehrlich would be cheaper in 1990; Dr. Ehrlich lost on all five. Dr. Lomborg felt sure that Dr. Simon's arguments were ''simple American right-wing propaganda,'' though presented with enough seriousness that they would be worth rebutting. Back in Aarhus, he started nightly study sessions with his statistics students to debunk Dr. Simon's contentions, using figures drawn from reports of the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the International Panel on Climate Change and other gatherers of official facts.''Three months into the project, we were convinced that we were being debunked instead,'' Dr. Lomborg said. ''Not everything he said is right. He has a definite right-wing slant. But most of the important things were actually correct.''Dr. Lomborg has presented his findings in ''The Skeptical Environmentalist,'' a book to be published in September by Cambridge University Press. The primary targets of the book, a substantial work of analysis with almost 3,000 footnotes, are statements made by environmental organizations like the Worldwatch Institute, the World Wildlife Fund and Greenpeace. He refers to the persistently gloomy fare from these groups as the Litany, a collection of statements that he argues are exaggerations or outright myths. Dr. Lomborg also chides journalists, saying they uncritically spread the Litany, and he accuses the public of an unfounded readiness to believe the worst.''The Litany has pervaded the debate so deeply and so long,'' Dr. Lomborg writes, ''that blatantly false claims can be made again and again, without any references, and yet still be believed.'' This is the fault not of academic environmental research, which is balanced and competent, he says, but rather of ''the communication of environmental knowledge, which taps deeply into our doomsday beliefs.''To understand the world as it is, Dr. Lomborg says, it is necessary to look at long-term global trends that tell more of the whole story than short-term trends and are less easy to manipulate. For example, the Worldwatch Institute, in its 1998 ''State of the World'' report, said, ''The world's forest estate has declined significantly in both area and quality in recent decades.'' But the longest data series of annual figures available from the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization shows that global forest cover has in fact increased, to 30.89 percent in 1994 from 30.04 percent of global land cover in 1950. The Worldwatch report goes on to claim that because of soaring demand for paper, ''Canada is losing some 200,000 hectares of forest a year.'' The cited reference, however, says that ''in fact Canada grew 174,600 more hectares of forest each year,'' Dr. Lomborg writes. Janet Abramovitz, Worldwatch's forest expert, said the world forest cover had shrunk significantly in the last 20 years. She based that contention on a different, shorter series of Food and Agriculture Organization statistics but declined to cite a percentage. The institute's figure on Canadian forest loss was an error, she said. In its report for 2000, the Worldwatch Institute cited the dangers it had foreseen in 1984 -- ''record rates of population growth, soaring oil prices, debilitating levels of international debt and extensive damage to forests from the new phenomenon of acid rain'' -- and lamented that ''we are about to enter a new century having solved few of these problems.''But in his book, Dr. Lomborg cites figures from the United States Census Bureau, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the European Environment Agency to show that the rate of world population growth has actually been dropping sharply since 1964; the level of international debt decreased slightly from 1984 to 1999; the price of oil, adjusted for inflation, is half what it was in the early 1980's; and the sulfur emissions that generate acid rain (which has turned out to do little if any damage to forests, though some to lakes) have been cut substantially since 1984. In an interview, the president of the Worldwatch Institute, Christopher Flavin, agreed that progress had been made in the four problems cited in the institute's 1984 report, but he said that had been mentioned in other institute reports. ''If you read through our materials as a whole,'' Mr. Flavin said, ''many of these improvements are acknowledged.''Dr. Lomborg has also been unable to find strong support in the official statistics for the regular predictions of disaster from Dr. Ehrlich. ''In the course of the 1970's,'' Dr. Ehrlich wrote in ''The Population Bomb,'' published in 1968, ''the world will experience starvation of tragic proportions -- hundreds of millions of people will starve to death.''Although world population has doubled since 1961, Dr. Lomborg writes, calorie intake has increased by 24 percent as a whole and by 38 percent in developing countries. Dr. Lomborg also takes issue with some global warming predictions. In assessing how waste gases could warm the world's climate, he says, there are four wild cards that affect the climate change models. One is the multiplier effect of carbon dioxide -- as it heats the atmosphere a little, the air can hold more water, and that heats the atmosphere a lot more. How much more is in question, but Dr. Lomborg cites satellite and weather balloon data that seem to weaken the case for a strong multiplier effect. The other three wild cards, Dr. Lomborg says, are the role of clouds, the effect of aerosols and the effect of the sunspot cycle on earth's climate. Dr. Lomborg believes that when it comes to computer models of climate change, the International Panel on Climate Change deals all four wild cards in a way that exaggerates the effect of greenhouse gases. This means, in his view, that the actual warming will be at the cooler end of the panel's predicted range. He contends that the internationally agreed Kyoto targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions will impose vast costs for little result. A more effective approach, according to Dr. Lomborg, would be to increase research on alternative sources of energy, like solar and fusion. But Dr. Kevin Trenberth of the National Center for Atmospheric Research said that new satellite data were likely to point toward a strong multiplier effect for carbon dioxide. And while Dr. Michael Oppenheimer, an expert on global warming at Environmental Defense, agrees that clouds and aerosols are still weak points in the climate models, he says  Dr. Lomborg's contention on the effects of the sunspot cycle is not widely accepted. As to Dr. Lomborg's policy recommendations, Dr. Oppenheimer said that investing in technology alone was ''like betting the farm on a policy in which we have less confidence than emissions reduction.'' In his view, a broad-based technology push would turn into a pork-barrel program and be far less efficient than the technology that would develop in response to a requirement to reduce emissions.''The Skeptical Environmentalist'' portrays several other elements of the Litany as little more than urban myths. One is the prediction that the world's forests and a large number of species are headed for catastrophe. Dr. Lomborg believes that forest loss has been less serious than is often described -- only 20 percent since the dawn of agriculture, not 67 percent, as stated by the World Wildlife Fund. He also puts the present annual rate of loss at 0.46 percent, as calculated by the Food and Agriculture Organization, rather than at 2 percent or more, the figure cited by many environmentalists. Given that the forests are not doing that badly, he is skeptical of claims that the world is about to lose half or more of its species. The often quoted figure that 40,000 species are lost every year comes from a 1979 article by Dr. Norman Myers, an ecologist at Oxford University. But this figure, Dr. Lomborg says, was not based on any evidence, just on Dr. Myers's conjecture that one million species might be lost from 1975 to 2000, which works out to be 40,000 species a year. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature, which maintains the Red Book of endangered species, concluded in 1992 that the extinction figures for mammals and birds were ''very small'' and that the total extinction rate, assuming 30 million species, was probably 2,300 species a year. Nonetheless, Dr. Lomborg says, Dr. Myers repeated his estimate in 1999 with a warning that ''we are into the opening stages of a human-caused biotic holocaust.''Dr. Myers confirmed in an interview that the figure of 40,000 extinctions a year had come from his estimate. He said that it was an illustration used to make his argument clear and that he gave figures only ''when I am speaking to a political leader or policy maker who says that in order to sell his message, he absolutely must have some number.''The International Union for the Conservation of Nature's estimate was too low, Dr. Myers said, because it considered a species extinct only after none of its members had been sighted for 50 years. ''All I am trying to do is to demonstrate that we are in the opening phase of a mass extinction,'' he said. Though no longer a member of Greenpeace, Dr. Lomborg still counts himself as an environmentalist and portrays his critique as based on the outlook of a leftist. ''I'm a left-wing guy,'' he says, ''and a vegetarian because I don't want to kill animals -- you can't play the 'he's right-wing so he's wrong' argument.''He believes that the environment must be protected and that regulation is often necessary. But exaggerating problems distorts society's priorities, he says, and makes it hard for society to make the best decisions. Writing about environmentalists, he says, ''The worse they can portray the environment, the easier it is for them to convince us that we need to spend more money on the environment rather than on hospitals, child day care, etc.''Those who abandon long-held faiths are often strident advocates of their new views. But Dr. Lomborg displays little of the convert's zeal.  His aim is not to preach free-market solutions for every problem or to deny that threats to the environment exist. His motive, he says, is simply to document that the facts, in his view, tell a far brighter story than the  Litany. Thomas Malthus argued in 1798 that population growth was certain to outrun food supply. As Dr. Lomborg sees it, Malthus's gloomy predictions still hold an iron grip over many minds, and are still wrong. Scientist at Work  Correction:  August 9, 2001, Thursday  Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times yesterday about Dr. Bjorn Lomborg, who is optimistic about many environmental trends, attributed a role in an anecdote to him erroneously. The person who won a 1980 bet that any five metals would be cheaper in 1990 was Dr. Julian L. Simon, a University of Maryland economist, who died in 1998. Correction: August 9, 2001, ThursdayBecause of an editing error, an article in Science Times yesterday about Dr. Bjorn Lomborg, who is optimistic about many environmental trends, attributed a role in an anecdote to him erroneously. The person who won a 1980 bet that any five metals would be cheaper in 1990 was Dr. Julian L. Simon, a University of Maryland economist, who died in 1998.

Christie Whitman arrives at the home ballpark of the Lowell Spinners, the Boston Red Sox' Class-A affiliate in the old mill town of Lowell, Mass. The stadium rises atop a cleaned-up toxic-waste site and is the kind of place administrators of the Environmental Protection Agency go. It's a glinting citadel of the new and well made, wedged among boarded-up factories. But there is no crowd waiting, only a few baseball staff members. When she was governor of New Jersey, Whitman caused a stir wherever she went; many expected her to ascend either to the United States Senate or to the vice-presidential slot on the 2000 Republican ticket. Instead she now visits toxic-waste sites. ''At least today is a clean day,'' Whitman notes. Often when she travels to inspect something, it's garbage or ooze or worse. This is pretty much a wasted appearance, so Whitman, who is a sports nut, decides to take batting practice. Aides urge her just to throw out a pitch, executive style. Undaunted, she steps into the batter's box and hoists a Louisville Slugger. Whitman is dressed to take cuts; she favors pant suits and sensible shoes. ''If she gets a hit it's on the record; if she whiffs this is background,'' an aide whispers. Whitman knocks a few past the pitcher's mound. Her consolation: after this event, at least she won't be denounced. Whitman's early tenure in the Bush cabinet has been rocky, to say the least. (Technically the E.P.A. lacks cabinet rank, but Whitman attends cabinet meetings, and Bush has said he favors legislation to make her America's first secretary of the environment.) She has borne embarrassments over the president's greenhouse decisions and the brunt of criticism that the new administration is anti-environment, though her own background on green issues is by and large centrist, even progressive at times. Whitman, it seems, has become the Bush administration's wind dummy. ''That's what Colin Powell has been calling me at cabinet meetings, the wind dummy,'' Whitman explains. ''It's a military term for when you are over the landing zone and you don't know what the winds are. You push the dummy out the door and see what happens to it.''Whitman knew the job would be rough, because, she says, ''in the E.P.A. it doesn't matter what the decision is, you are always making some group intensely mad.'' Enviros are furious if the E.P.A. doesn't impose rules, conservatives are furious if it does. Most cabinet jobs come with constituencies that have a built-in incentive to love-bomb the agency boss (with the implied promise of future cushy employment); also there's the joy of traveling around, handing out those oversize photo-op federal checks to flashing smiles. At the E.P.A., by contrast, there's just unceasing complaint and rarely a soft landing. The agency's two previous administrators -- William Reilly, a Republican, and Carol Browner, a Democrat -- were both highly accomplished, and neither left for plush jobs with big corporations or the environmental establishment. And instead of handing out checks, E.P.A. bosses spend their days telling people that they can't do what they want to do, or that they must correct mistakes at their own expense. Whitman, for instance, just handed General Electric a $480 million invoice for a dredging of the Hudson River to remove carcinogenic PCB's. But a role plummeting into the landing zone seems harsh even by the standards of the E.P.A. The Bush administration assumed office not knowing which way the wind was blowing on environmental issues, pooh-poohing global warming and energy conservation despite polls showing that a strong majority of voters, including most Republicans, want more done to protect nature. Now Whitman is scrambling to undo some of the self-inflicted damage. Her Hudson decision, for example, seems intended in part to avoid another brace of ''Bush Cancels . . . '' headlines. In addition to clashing with interest groups, Whitman must deal with administration figures who don't cotton to environmental niceties. As part of his energy strategy, Vice President Dick Cheney asked Whitman to review whether the E.P.A. should require emission reductions from old (mainly Midwestern) power plants and petroleum refineries that, owing to an exception in the Clean Air Act, are allowed to pollute more than new facilities. For the last several weeks, Whitman has been working through her decision on the issue, confusingly called ''new source review'' even though the subject is old facilities. (The decision was due to be announced Aug 17.) If Whitman decides to stand by new source review (as her office has intimated she will), Cheney and important lobbies like the Edison Electric Institute may blow a fuse. But if she does not, she'll face another kind of explosion; any action that could be seen as Whitman's easing off on pollution control to please energy industries could be devastating to her -- and the White House -- politically. Why did Whitman want this post? ''I didn't say I wanted the job; I said I took it,'' she replies pointedly. Whitman says she had hoped for United Nations ambassador, special trade representative or even secretary of state. Instead Bush offered her the E.P.A., maybe because he thought Whitman was the best woman for the job, maybe because a few years of making everyone ''intensely mad'' would diminish her as a future rival. Not long ago, Christie Todd Whitman was perhaps the brightest female star within the Republican Party. She rose to prominence in her home state, New Jersey, with her near-upset of the seemingly invincible Senator Bill Bradley in 1990, then won the statehouse in 1993 and 1997. Her Republican credentials are impeccable: the Todds being her father, Webster, a wealthy developer and adviser to Dwight Eisenhower, and her mother, Eleanor, a Republican national committeewoman; the Whitman being her husband, John, grandson to Charles Whitman Sr., Republican governor of New York. Whip smart, conservative on economics and liberal on social issues (including abortion), she seemed a dream come true for a Republican Party short on female talent. Arriving at Trenton after her 1993 victory, Whitman declared New Jersey ''open for business,'' grumbled about environmental prosecution of developers and cut the enforcement staff of the state's Department of Environmental Protection. New Jersey was then recovering from the early-1990's mini-recession, making jobs a priority for voters, while the mostly conservative intellectual circles in which Whitman traveled were aggressively anti-environmental, viewing tree huggers as enemies of prosperity. John Weingart, then an official of the D.E.P. and now at the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University, says that early in her governorship Whitman ''gave the benefit of the doubt to anyone who had disputes with environmental rules.'' The protection-is-bad view would be so conclusively disproved by the combination of declining pollution and economic boom in the 1990's that today Whitman sounds almost indistinguishable from Al Gore when she says, ''Ecological protection and economic development can go hand in hand.''As the 1990's progressed, the economy strengthened and polls increasingly showed that voters wanted environmental programs, Whitman began to realign herself. She backed plans to speed cleanup of toxic-waste sites, reduce water pollution, safeguard shorelines, even to ban dog-walking on Cape May beaches to protect the piping plover. She endorsed federal action against high-polluting Midwest power plants -- the very issue she must now tackle at E.P.A. Most impressive, she put together a $1.4 billion state bond issue to place one million acres of New Jersey land into preservation status. Whitman then became interested in the reform of environmental law, which she views as ''effective but cumbersome and too obsessed with process instead of performance.'' In 1996 she gave the keynote speech at Yale for the Next Generation Project, a loose coalition of academics and environmental regulators who want to replace the unwieldy web of dozens of overlapping ecological strictures with a few simple rules that give companies broad authority to make their own decisions, as long as pollution declines. Whitman has stayed close to the Yale project, which represents the environmental center: it wants improved protection but says there are too many rules and not enough cost-benefit analysis. On Earth Day 1996, Whitman took some students canoeing on Rancocas Creek in New Jersey for a conservation photo-op. Reporters shouted questions about a Yale-inspired reform she had just proposed, to simplify state water discharge permits. Whitman shouted back that, yes, in some cases it would allow companies to pollute, but overall, water pollution would decline. It was a bad public-relations move: several editorials depicted Whitman as canoeing a scenic river after signing paperwork favored by industry. ''This showed she was practicing green-scam, talking environmentalism and doing the opposite,'' says Jeff Tittel, director of the New Jersey Sierra Club. Ultimately, however, nearly everything about the New Jersey environment got better under Whitman. Toxic emissions declined by half; days of dangerous smog levels declined by two-thirds. Thousands of toxic-waste sites and landfills were cleaned up. The Delaware River's health improved spectacularly. Recycling hit 60 percent, the best in the nation. But then, most environmental trends in most states were positive during the 1990's. Acid rain, a big issue of the first Bush presidency, has vanished from the political radar because acid-rain emissions went down so rapidly in the past decade. Whitman and Bush would come to Washington after a period in which all forms of pollution except greenhouse gases declined -- and yet polls show large pluralities believe pollution to be increasing. It's a recipe for unsettled politics. As the 2000 elections approached, many expected Whitman -- barred by state law from seeking a third term as governor in 2001 -- to run for the Senate seat being vacated by Frank Lautenberg. Having nearly knocked off the popular Bill Bradley when she was still a virtual unknown, she might have seemed a shoo-in to defeat the Democratic political novice Jon Corzine. Whitman began preparing for a run, then stopped. She attributes her withdrawal to money, which Corzine rolled in. ''When I started raising money for the Senate I went to 50 fund-raisers in just one month.'' she says. ''How was I supposed to do the governor's job?''But there was also the real chance that if Whitman ran for the Senate she would have lost, possibly badly. Both her statehouse victories came by one-point margins over weak opponents. And throughout the 1990's, New Jersey grew increasingly Democratic; Gore would take the state in a walkover, and Corzine won despite minimal qualifications. Whitman had yet another incentive to get out of New Jersey politics -- to stay one step ahead of the posse. She had enacted state tax cuts, and the fiscal bill was about to come due. Remaining in the statehouse for the final year of her term would have forced Whitman to deal with a budget mess -- to say nothing of a racial-profiling mess, a lying-judge mess and the latest New Jersey auto-insurance mess. Perhaps that Metroliner ride to Washington would be appealing, even for a hot-seat post. Whitman came to Washington determined to make the best of the office she merely ''took.'' She steeped herself in environmental arcana, phrases like ''combined sewer overflow'' and ''mercury deposition'' tripping off her lips. She vowed to work with enthusiasm, almost like a candidate -- she has already traveled to all of the E.P.A.'s 10 regions and met with dozens of green and brown (corporate) groups, from the League of American Bicyclists to the National Pork Producers Council. But Whitman had scarcely been confirmed when she had her first wind-dummy experience. She flew to Trieste on Feb. 28 to meet the G8 environmental ministers and there declared that the Bush administration supported mandatory reduction of carbon-dioxide emissions, a commitment of the Kyoto global-warming treaty negotiated by the Clinton administration. Whitman did not clear her comments with the White House but did know that a Bush position paper said he favored carbon dioxide controls. Whitman flew home from Italy, and a week later Bush announced that he was abandoning such controls and called Kyoto ''fatally flawed.'' International commentary called Whitman humiliated, cuckolded; every pundit in America spun out a column on how bad she looked. Greg Wetstone of the Natural Resources Defense Council said Whitman ''suffered the most immediate and visible loss of clout ever for a cabinet officer.'' Some editorial pages called on her to resign. Whitman appealed to Bush to change his mind on Kyoto; she is the highest-ranking office holder ever to lead the E.P.A., and, as a fellow former governor, someone who can look the president in the eye. She wrote a passionate memo that someone leaked, to embarrass her. She has since talked to Bush many times about global warming at cabinet meetings but has never met with him alone on the subject. So far, she has won only his commitment that ''America needs to have something that we are for.'' The idea that something must be done about greenhouse gases -- either through Kyoto or through an American domestic initiative -- has won prominent supporters close to Bush, including Powell, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice, Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill, the deputy chief of staff, Josh Bolten, and the White House policy advisers Gary Edson and John Bridgeland, two moderates. The internal White House working group on climate change has been more or less taken over by Rice, to whom Whitman now speaks at least once a week, Rice having become her main contact within the administration's inner circle. That the right has begun to censure members of the global-warming team is a sure sign it is making progress with Bush; the columnist Robert Novak recently blasted the group for ''pressing the president to look more and more like Al Gore.'' Whitman or Powell or both may attend a Kyoto conference in Morocco this fall, and they won't go unless they have something to announce. While commentary focused on the Greenhouse flip-flop, from Whitman's perspective the question was where it left her leadership. Whitman says that when Bush offered her the job at E.P.A., he told her the administration's ecology policy-making role would be hers alone. ''I asked him what the role for the Council on Environmental Quality would be,'' Whitman says, referring to the White House advisory organization, ''and he said: 'I don't even know what that is. I want you to be the environmental person.' ''Defeated for the moment on global warming, Whitman decided to take the president at his word and make environmental decisions on her own. Her next big move: postponing a regulation limiting arsenic in the water supply. Coming just a week after the Kyoto flip-flop, Whitman's arsenic decision seemed to confirm the worst suspicions about the new administration. News accounts featured adjectives like ''stunned'' and ''outraged.'' In a typical comment, Bill Press of CNN declared that the administration had ''declared war on the environment.'' News reports all pointed out that the National Academy of Sciences had conclusively shown a need to reduce arsenic levels. And though she had not actually canceled arsenic protection, but rather held for review a rule that wouldn't have taken effect until 2006, she concedes that it was ''a dumb decision on my part politically, really dumb.'' Whitman adds that the dumbness was hers alone. Per her portfolio, she did not consult anyone in the White House; they learned of the decision in the newspaper, like everyone else. ''Politically, I should have just let it go and allowed the courts to decide,'' Whitman says. Had she not held the arsenic rule, municipal water agencies would have sued to block it. Years hence a judge would have imposed a settlement, and the judiciary would have taken the blame for any faults in the outcome. Following the one-two punch of kyoto and arsenic, conventional wisdom assumed that Whitman really had, as Bill Press put it, ''declared war on the environment.'' Yet the majority of her official acts so far have been to uphold Clinton-Browner positions. Whitman imposed the maximum Hudson River cleanup. She has put into effect powerful new rules on wetlands protection and pesticide reduction. She endorsed Clinton's extremely strict standard for ground-water protection at the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste storage site. She upheld a rule requiring power plants upwind of national parks to reduce emissions until the parks are clear. She signed a treaty banning dangerous ''persistent organic'' chemicals found in pesticides. Cheney notwithstanding, she has issued orders that Midwestern power plants reduce emissions. Most important, Whitman mandated that refineries alter diesel fuel to remove pollutants. A principal reason smog is declining is that gasoline has been reformulated to remove pollutants; Whitman's order extends the standard to diesel fuel. This is significant because public-health studies have shown diesel pollutants to be leading factors in both asthma and premature deaths from respiratory diseases. But hardly anyone knows Whitman took this action, imposed over the protests of the oil industry, Bush's core constituency. The way in which it was announced reflects how tone-deaf the administration is regarding the environment. The diesel rule received no political rollout, perhaps because it was started under Clinton, and the White House has shown great difficulty in saying anything that boils down to ''Clinton was right about this.''Another missed political chance came a few weeks ago, when Whitman offhandedly told a Senate hearing that she was working on a Yale-style proposal to simplify the rules involving reduction of emissions from power plants. Multiple, overlapping sets of rules would be replaced by a single standard that simply required overall pollution from power production to decline, but left it up to plant managers to figure out the details and authorized them to trade emissions rights in search of the cheapest solutions. This is the approach that has worked so well at cutting acid rain. But the plan was given a feeble name, the ''multipollutant approach,'' which makes it seem as if the E.P.A. favors a greater variety of pollutants. With gazes fixed on wedge issues and the 2002 vote, Democrats have already begun calling Whitman's idea another ''rollback.''Will Whitman become isolated as the moderate, abortion-rights representative in a mainly conservative administration? She bristles at this question, pointing out that fellow cabinet officers like Gale Norton, secretary of the interior, and Ann Veneman, secretary of agriculture -- Whitman has lunch with them monthly -- are also in favor of abortion rights, ''and you never hear anything about that.'' She has learned from her experience with Kyoto, however, to listen more closely to the White House's script. After initially playing down the idea of conservation, the administration, especially the vice president, has recently been emphasizing it. So Whitman has adjusted her schedule to spend more time talking about E.P.A.'s Energy Star program, which endorses products that reduce energy use. She has not campaigned for greenhouse rules in public,  la John McCain and Joseph Lieberman, so as not to open a split with the president. Some part of her may sense inevitable confrontation, however. Asked how long she expects to stay at E.P.A., Whitman says that the president has her resignation letter in his desk. Reminded that it is tradition for cabinet officers to file an undated resignation letter, she explains, ''What I mean is, I've told him that if I have to go he shouldn't think I would make it awkward.''For some reason deeply seated in the party's psyche -- maybe that it simply cannot bring itself to admit that regulations are sometimes good for us -- Republicans keep failing to come to terms with environmental sentiment. Environmentalism is to Republicans what defense is to Democrats: the issue they just don't know how to deal with and really, really wish would go away. Bush is only the latest Republican leader to stumble on the environment, and Christie Whitman is trying to change that. But she may well end up tossed out of the plane just to see where she lands. Gregg Easterbrook is a senior editor at The New Republic and at Beliefnet and a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution.

RICHARD ARMITAGE, the deputy secretary of state, is known as a blunt-speaking, down-to-earth public official. He minced few words in Australia recently, and hit a nerve surprisingly raw for a country considered one of the United States's most dependable allies. The Bush administration has irritated many allies with its aversion to treaties, especially the Kyoto Protocol on global warming and the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. Mr. Armitage, however, raised hackles as he singled out a treaty that the administration is partial to: the Australian-New Zealand United States Treaty, or Anzus, a mutual defense pact signed at the start of the cold war. So partial, in fact, that the deputy secretary felt compelled to remind Australians that Americans would die to fulfill it -- and that Washington would expect an equal sacrifice. Blending what Australians interpreted as condescension and old-fashioned militarism, Mr. Armitage declared: ''I'm not sure all our friends here in Australia understand the significance of an alliance to Americans. It's not a matter of political convenience or economic interaction, although some of that, inevitably.''But for us, an alliance is an obligation, if necessary, to fight and die for each other. That's what it means. That's why an alliance is submitted to the U.S. Congress. It has to be debated. Because we're talking about, for the U.S. side, our sons and daughter fighting and dying if Australia comes under attack. And by the way, we're talking about Australian sons and daughters who would be willing to sacrifice their lives to help defend the United States.'' (New Zealand's children are safe: that country dropped out of the treaty because it objected to Washington's nuclear policies.)Now, Mr. Armitage likes Australia. He travels there relatively frequently, and has often expressed affection and admiration for the country. And Australians generally admire the United States. They cite common characteristics -- independence of spirit, absence of the British class system, love of sports and the outdoors. But -- usually beneath the surface -- there is also a streak of resentment at being bossed around by ''the Yanks.'' Memories of Australia's painful involvement in Vietnam, prompted by a request from Lyndon B. Johnson, still rankle. Australians worry that the United States may someday make a similar request over Taiwan. In fact, Mr. Armitage, visiting as a private citizen two years ago, angered Australians by suggesting that Washington would expect them to fight alongside Americans to protect Taiwan if the Chinese invaded. And his recent comments were widely interpreted as another preview of a call to arms over Taiwan -- even though he also said that the ''threat assessment'' on the likelihood for such a conflict ''has actually receded a fair amount.''SO the momentum of an anti-Armitage backlash gathered rather quickly. Leading the charge was a former prime minister, Malcolm Fraser. A conservative, Mr. Fraser said in the newspaper The Australian that years ago, American officials ''would not even dream of telling Australia publicly what we must do.''''That such people are now prepared to tell Australians this,'' he wrote, ''represents a fundamental change in Anzus.''He went on to suggest that Australia reduce its efforts to maintain a strong relationship with Washington, and replace it by a greater emphasis on improved relations with Asian nations. Mr. Fraser was actually being quite polite. Irritated by the Bush administration's heavy hand, he suggested Australia should withdraw from Anzus altogether. That was, coincidentally, about a month before President Bush's announcement last week that America would, at some point, withdraw from one of its own scorned pacts: the 1972 ABM Treaty.

To the Editor:You report that President Bush said the United States would withdraw from the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty ''at a time convenient to America'' (news article, Aug. 24).  That's funny. He didn't campaign on withdrawing from the ABM treaty. But then, he didn't campaign on withdrawing from the Kyoto treaty on global warming either, or on deferring action on yet other treaties. With no public debate and no electoral mandate, what right does this man with no foreign policy experience have to destroy everything that administrations before his so painstakingly built up? NINA MOLLETT  Juneau, Alaska, Aug. 24, 2001

TO go or not to go? The United States decided last week to snub a racism conference in Durban, South Africa, by sending only a midlevel delegation to protest efforts to equate Zionism with racism and promote reparations for slavery. In a world where international meetings often provide a forum for nations to challenge or second-guess America's dominance and interests, it isn't always easy to decide when to stay home and when to plunge in and fight.''They create terrific problems for American policymakers,'' Lee H. Hamilton, director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, said of such gatherings. ''The agenda is often taken over by voices we don't agree with.''Mr. Hamilton, the former Democratic chairman of the House International Relations Committee, said he was ambivalent about boycotting the Durban meeting, which began this weekend, though ''in general, my instinct is that the U.S. should go to these conferences and make its case.''Gaddis Smith, an emeritus professor of history at Yale, said it was a ''serious mistake'' for the United States to absent itself from conferences where conflict awaits, or to scale back its presence. The Bush administration is demonstrating ''a head-in-the-sand attitude,'' Mr. Smith said. ''We're more likely to be a target of anti-American rhetoric if we're not there. It says the United States has something to hide.''Ever since the Senate dashed the hopes of President Woodrow Wilson and voted to reject American membership in the League of Nations, the United States has shown itself willing to shun world gatherings it distrusts. At times, the mere threat of an American boycott has prompted other nations to address Washington's objections. In 1980, with tensions boiling over in the Middle East, the Carter administration derailed an Arab effort to expel Israel from the United Nations General Assembly by making clear that it would withdraw and effectively paralyze the organization. But sometimes threats are insufficient. In 1984, the Reagan administration withdrew from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, complaining that it was wasteful, poorly managed and a stage for anti-Western propaganda. The American departure put the agency under economic pressure, and Unesco's board voted the following year to tone down its activism. But the gambit failed to produce rapid reforms. After a 17-year boycott, House lawmakers this spring finally urged the administration to rejoin a much less politicized organization. In 1992, American officials stewed for months over whether President George Bush would attend the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. The administration opposed the two main agreements at the environmental conference -- accords to protect biodiversity and curb emissions that contribute to global warming -- but with the United States a major force in both conservation and pollution, Mr. Bush risked being blamed for singlehandedly wrecking the meeting by staying home. He decided to attend and ultimately persuaded the world leaders to water down their treaty on emissions. In 1995, First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton led an American delegation to the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women. Many Republican lawmakers had opposed the American participation, and Mrs. Clinton's attendance in particular, because of China's poor human rights record and their belief that the conference would endorse abortion. When Chinese security agents clamped down on demonstrators at the conference, Mrs. Clinton excoriated her Chinese hosts for their failure to tolerate dissenting views. Running through the American ambivalence toward such meetings are competing imperatives. With a commercial, political or military presence in virtually every corner of the globe, the United States has a unique stake in international affairs. To protect its interests, it secured a dominant role in the main institutions of the post-World War II era: the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. YET the American impulse has been to dismiss the international order when it is seen as running counter to the national interest or as meddling in domestic affairs. ''We Americans always talk about multilateralism,'' said Kenneth N. Waltz, a political scientist who teaches at Columbia University. ''In fact, we're unilateralists.''That perception, which is widespread among American allies as well as critics, has grown in recent months as the Bush administration has rejected the Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty with Russia and the Kyoto accord on global warming. Resentment has also built over the United States' failure to pay arrears to the United Nations. The Bush administration learned this spring what happens when it ignores such rumblings: the United States itself gets boycotted. For the first time in its 54-year history, the United Nations Human Rights Commission failed to approve a seat for the United States. The vote, which was seen as a rebuke to the Bush administration's foreign policy, left astonished American officials vowing to press for human rights from the sidelines. But that's not the same as being in the game.

David Crosby, the mustachioed, silver-haired third of Crosby, by Stills & Nash, claims not to think when he plays. ''Gets in the way,'' he said. So on a cool night at the PNC Bank Arts Center here recently, he said he was on autopilot of sorts, tapping into something visceral, when he stepped up to the microphone after the trio's third song, ''Dj Vu,'' and urged audience members to sign a petition at intermission against the Bush administration's energy policy.''You'll find that most of us, most musicians, are very vocally opposed to not just what's laughably called an energy policy,'' Mr. Crosby said later, ''but to this administration's complete disregard for the planet.''Riled by an energy plan they call a sop to business and a grave threat to the environment, Crosby, Stills & Nash and about a dozen other popular bands joined together over the summer to stir their fans to action, as Congress prepares to consider significant energy legislation this autumn. Part of an effort, organized by the drummer Michael Diamond, or Mike D., the founder of the Beastie Boys, with the help of several major environmental groups, performers as disparate in style and following as Jackson Browne, Moby, Matchbox 20 and the Barenaked Ladies have permitted volunteers to canvass their concerts for signatures against the energy plan. Most, like Mr. Crosby, have urged fans to sign petitions at the stadiums or online. More than 30,000 signatures have been sent to Congress as a result of such efforts, said Stuart Trevelyan, a spokesman for Save Our Environment, the coalition of environmental organizations working with the musicians. Mr. Diamond, the singer Alanis Morissette and the Dave Matthews Band are sending e-mails to fans asking them to log their protests with the Senate via electronic postcards on saveourenvironment .org. The Dave Matthews Band alone has a 400,000-member e-mail list it plans to tap, Mr. Trevelyan said. Built on the assertion that the United States is suffering its worst energy crisis since the 1973 Arab oil embargo, the White House energy plan includes a range of measures that administration officials say balances environmental protection with the production of fuel supplies while also bolstering economic growth. The administration has taken some steps on its own, but it is up to Congress to introduce legislation that fleshes out a national energy policy. Environmentalists were rankled recently by a House energy bill that they said gave more than $30 billion in tax incentives to energy companies while calling for drilling in protected federal lands. It remains to be seen whether the celebrities' campaign influences the energy plan, especially the aspects that most worry its  critics, like opening more federal lands to oil and gas exploration. But so far, environmentalists are pleased to have such marquee names on their side.''We're about to have critical votes in the Senate,'' said Gene Karpinski, executive director of the U.S. Public Interest Research Group, an advocacy organization. ''And we need as many voices as possible speaking about the plan and reaching out to different people, and that's what these artists are doing.''Activism among musicians is hardly new. But if musicians 15 years ago rallied fans around heart-rending causes like famine in Africa, they have recently embraced more complex approaches to political and economic issues. Bono, the lead singer of U2, has joined advocates and economists to lobby industrialized countries to forgive the foreign debt of developing nations. The Beastie Boys, Moby and others regularly organize and play at benefits to aid Tibet. Sting and the Grateful Dead guitarist Bob Weir have performed to raise money to protect rain forests in the Amazon. Fighting a Republican administration on the environment at a Crosby, Stills & Nash concert may seem like preaching to the choir, but as latecomers rushed to their seats in the PNC Bank Arts Center, most merely smiled at the Sierra Club's request for their signatures and then strode on. Still, the canvassers expected to get 500 to 600 signatures from the 17,000 people attending the concert that evening. People stopped every few minutes to sign, despite the fact that the concert had already begun. ''He's given away $33 billion in tax credits to big oil,'' a Sierra Club volunteer, Steve Ember, told Eileen Ford, 48, as she signed the petition and her husband, Kevin, waited his turn. Mr. Ford, who said he worked in management, needed no argument. ''The fact that we rejected the Kyoto protocols was extremely shortsighted,'' he said, referring to the international treaty on reducing emissions linked to global warming. Mr. Diamond seemed to reach the same conclusion as he read about the details of the Bush energy plan when it was published in May. In a telephone interview from New York, he said he was particularly concerned about President Bush's proposal to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska to oil drilling as a response to the electricity crisis in California. ''If you think about it for more than a minute,'' Mr. Diamond said, ''you realize that a pipeline that starts in Alaska is not going to get here for another 5 or 10 years.''Mr. Diamond contacted Adam Werbach, a former president of the Sierra Club, who, in turn, introduced him to the Save Our Environment coalition. Mr. Diamond cast around to other artists and said that because of their own concerns, they were easily convinced of the need to unite against the energy policy. On the Internet, Mr. Diamond calls on fans to act: ''Dear peoples, though I rarely do stuff like this, pestering the masses, this is a topic that is too vital, too central and too important to our entire planet to ignore,'' his online letter says. ''I'm asking for your help to stop George W. Bush's energy plan.''In legislation backed by the White House that is thick with arcane tax and economic-incentive schemes, drilling in the Arctic  refuge in Alaska has become the most accessible symbol used by environmentalists  to convey the clash between their priorities and those of the Bush energy plan. The message seems to have taken hold. Taking a pen held out at the New Jersey concert, 21-year-old Joshua Storch signed the petition and said, ''I know all about Alaska and I'm totally opposed to drilling there.''In late July, when Ms. Morissette performed in Alaska, she spoke out against drilling in the refuge. Midway through her set at the Egan Center in downtown Anchorage, she urged the crowd to get involved in oil development issues and to sign the petition circulating in the lobby. But in oil-friendly Alaska, the pitch drew a mixed response of cheers, polite applause and a smattering of boos.''This is the state that oil built,'' said Patrick Gillan, 32, who refused to sign the petition. Mr. Gillan pointed out the importance of oil in the state's economy: ''Most Alaskans are pretty honest with themselves -- We need oil, and we need ANWR,'' he said, referring to the wildlife refuge by its acronym. Ms. Morissette tuned in to the debate over the refuge in June, after Mr. Diamond contacted her about the energy plan. She began researching the issue and digging into the environmental movement, reading ''The Last Hours of Ancient Sunlight,'' a book by Thom Hartmann about the environment and spirituality. Meanwhile, Mr. Werbach, the former Sierra Club president, also contacted Ms. Morissette about fighting development of the refuge. Her role, Ms. Morissette said, is as publicist, not policy expert. ''By taking part in it myself, I hope I encourage people to do the same.''Ms. Morissette's message resonated with many in the Anchorage audience, including those who had worked in the North Slope oil fields. Those circulating petitions said they gathered about 300 signatures, or roughly 70 percent of those they approached.''One place in Alaska, one place on earth, should be left alone,'' said Rodney Jones, 46, as he signed. Mr. Jones said he had worked in the oil fields of Alaska in the 1980's. Amy Lynnbille, 26, said that she had relatives who worked in the oil patch but that she opposed refuge development. ''When have we done enough?''

Taking a cue from broad-based class-action lawsuits like those filed on behalf of Holocaust survivors or against tobacco companies, a group of environmental lawyers is exploring novel legal strategies to adopt against global warming. What makes the approach of this environmental fight extraordinary is that the plaintiffs would be not just people who live near a source of pollution but those who are thousands, even many thousands, of miles away. Last month two dozen lawyers from around the country met in Washington to explore the avenues they might pursue to force the United States or corporations to reduce emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases, which scientists say are already warming the planet and posing serious risks to human health, property and even entire nations. The lawyers, representing groups like Greenpeace, the World Wildlife Fund and the Natural Resources Defense Council, envision winning damages for people or whole countries that have suffered adverse effects of global warming. They say they were inspired by the Bush administration's refusal to go along with the Kyoto Protocol, the internationally negotiated framework for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions. The United Nations estimates the costs of global warming at more than $300 billion a year.''Those who are directly injured in a very concrete way by the impacts of climate change are concluding that they won't get the remedy they need through the political process, whether it's the international or domestic political process,'' said one organizer of the strategy session, Brian Dunkiel of Burlington, Vt., former counsel to Friends of the Earth. Suits could be brought, for example, on behalf of Tuvalu, a tiny nine-island nation in the South Pacific. Tuvalu is home to some 10,000 people, and scientists say it could vanish within 50 years because of rising sea levels caused by the earth's warming. Already, residents are exploring the possibility of relocating to Australia or New Zealand as ''environmental refugees.''Plaintiffs could also include residents of other island nations like the Maldives or Jamaica, or of the Netherlands, where the land is not much above sea level. They might include  the frail elderly, whose health is at particular risk on very hot days. Defendants could be federal agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency or the Energy Department, for subsidizing the use of fossil fuels or accused of failing to regulate emissions. Or they could be industries, like power companies.''Whenever you have a diverse population being injured and not getting the remedy they need through the political process,'' Mr. Dunkiel said, ''or when you need to protect a minority from the majority, that's why the courts were set up. Until the courts intervened in the civil rights movement, there was stalemate.''Spokesmen for federal agencies declined to comment, saying the idea was for now hypothetical. Privately, they suggested that a defense could include the arguments that there were no binding laws regulating global warming per se and that various plaintiffs had no legal standing. One conservative analyst was more dismissive: Anne Hayes, an environmental lawyer for the Pacific Legal Foundation, called the approach ''nuts.''''They will have a real hard time proving causation, that the United States government has caused sea levels to rise,'' Ms. Hayes said. ''You can't even tell what the weather is going to be two days from now; do they honestly think they can attribute some global weather event to some discrete action by a government agency?''Dan Esty, a professor of environmental law and policy at Yale Law School, was skeptical that the courts would look with favor on the environmentalists' initiative, although he added that ''there is always the possibility that new legal theories can be brought to bear.''Mr. Dunkiel, on the other hand, said, ''The case we're preparing is grounded in well-established traditional federal environmental laws where federal agencies would be the defendants.''Still, the environmental lawyers have not decided whether their effort will ultimately be pursued chiefly in the federal courts or in international tribunals. They have been focusing in part on a 60-year-old landmark case involving a Canadian smelting plant that was damaging crops, timber and livestock in Washington State. An international arbiter found that one country could not pollute another without being held liable. The discussion at the lawyers' strategy session was based in part on work by Andrew Strauss, professor of international law at Widener University Law School in Delaware. Professor Strauss was recently asked by the New Economics Foundation, an environmental research group in London, to examine the possibility of poorer countries' seeking compensation from wealthier ones that emit  most of the world's pollution. Such approaches, Professor Strauss said in an interview, are still evolving as globalization links nations in important business relationships, with disputes once settled by diplomacy coming to rely on the law. ''This is part of that whole broad movement toward the legalization of international relations,'' he said. There has been fierce resistance to that movement, especially in the United States, where many see American participation in international courts as a threat to sovereignty. That sentiment could create big problems for any country trying to sue the United States over global warming: in all likelihood, the United States would simply not agree to the jurisdiction of a world court. But as some see it, that would hardly end the matter.''In some circumstances,'' Professor Esty said, ''legal actions are evaluated or pursued not with expectations of success in court, but recognizing that a real victory would be in the court of public opinion.''

Being human, you first think of those you love. Then, if you are lucky enough to find them safe, you grieve for those who are lost -- their faces still smiling out expectantly from downtown's new quilt of mass death, the vast patchwork of fliers headlined MISSING.Then you grieve for the city whose once indelible profile was mutilated,  just like that, on one beautiful September morning. After that you think of your country, and another kind of shock sets in. Something has been lost there too, but not all of what's gone may be a cause for mourning. We live in a different America today than we did only the day before Tuesday. Yes, as it's incanted hourly, we have lost our untroubled freedom of movement that we consider a birthright. We have lost our illusion of impregnability. But beneath those visceral imperatives an entire culture has been transformed. This week's nightmare, it's now clear, has awakened us from a frivolous if not decadent decadelong dream, even as it dumps us into an uncertain future we had never bargained for. The dream was simple -- that we could have it all without having to pay any price, and that national suffering of almost any kind could be domesticated into an experience of  virtual terror akin to a theme park ride. The first part of that dream had already started to collapse with the fall of the stock market, the rise in unemployment and the evaporation of the surplus, well before terrorists achieved the literal annihilation of the most commanding edifice of American capitalism. But the dream's second part was still going strong right until Tuesday. The previously planned cover that People magazine scrapped that afternoon to make way for the thousands dead was yet another story about shark attacks. Never mind that the rate of shark attacks has been routine this year, and that sharks are a statistically minuscule cause of mortality at any time. (There have been at most two deaths in any year since 1990.) The great shark scare of 2001 -- already speeding to the dustbin of history, along with such other summer ephemera as Gary Condit, Robert Blake and Lizzie Grubman -- was typical of an age in which we inflated troublesome but passing crises into catastrophes that provided the illusion of a national test of character, or some kind of moral equivalent of war, but in fact were for most of us merely invitations to indulge in cost-free hyperventilation. From the rampaging fears over school shootings following Columbine (at a time when U.S. juvenile homicide rates were falling to a 33-year low) to the protracted bellicosity surrounding Elin Gonzlez to the California blackout that didn't happen at the start of this summer, we've been looking for a Pearl Harbor. But always a Pearl Harbor of few casualties -- always a Pearl Harbor that could readily be brought to ''closure.''In our pop culture, this same impulse for vicarious, finite warfare could be seen in the rise of TV reality programs like ''Survivor,'' ''Fear Factor'' and ''Lost'' in which we thrill to the spectacle of contestants competing in war games -- always with the understanding that no one is really going to get hurt in a prime-time slice of ''reality'' that must move the sponsors' products. On the day before Tuesday, after all, ''survival,'' ''fear'' and ''lost'' had different meanings than they did the day after. Our desire for vicarious battle, the one commodity a stock market bubble couldn't buy, also explains the fetishization of World War II. This week everyone has been comparing Tuesday's events to Pearl Harbor, but only two months ago Pearl Harbor had been sanitized as ''Pearl Harbor.'' In that Hollywood version of the attack, seen by countless teenagers who may now have to fight an actual war, the enemy seems polite, the violence looks like the digitalized carnage of video games, and a harrowing American defeat gets an upbeat ''victory'' coda that minimizes and vastly shortens the ensuing years of hardship, loss and heroism that were required for the Allies to win a war. At the high end of what I suspect is the now-defunct World War II craze is HBO's brand new series, ''Band of Brothers,'' whose relentlessly publicized premiere preceded this week's tragedy. ''There was a time when the world asked ordinary men to do extraordinary things,'' went the ad copy, which took pains to remind us that the miniseries was ''based on the true story.'' In a way, the pitch enshrines the complacency of the day before Tuesday, with its assumption that the prospect of civilians having to make any kind of extraordinary effort for a national good was as far in the past as the knights of the Round Table. That fat, daydreaming America is gone now, way gone -- as spent as the tax-rebate checks, as forgotten as the 2000 campaign's debate over prescription-drug plans, as bankrupt as our dot-com fantasies of instant millions, as vaporized as the faith that high-tech surveillance and weaponry would keep us safe. The America that saw Disney's ''Pearl Harbor'' is as far removed from the America that was attacked on Tuesday as the America that listened to Orson Welles's ''War of the Worlds'' was from the America attacked at Pearl Harbor. ''Instead of the next big thing being some new technological innovation or medical breakthrough,'' wrote David Rieff of our post-Tuesday nation in The Los Angeles Times this week, ''the next big thing is likely to be fear.''For the America that is gone, the America that could have it all and feel no pain beyond that on cable TV, George W. Bush was the perfect president. We could have a big tax cut (or at least some of us could) along with increases in spending for better schools and defense -- and all without having to dip into the Social Security stash. We could lick our energy crisis -- does anyone still remember the energy crisis? -- while still guzzling gas. Faith-based institutions would take care of the poor and unfortunate. No serviceman would have to spend any more time in harm's way than Mr. Bush (or most political leaders of his generation, regardless of party) did during Vietnam. Since Tuesday, there has been a towering leader in view -- Rudolph Giuliani -- and, in a lucid and rational Colin Powell, potentially another. The big-three network anchors have upheld pre-Drudge journalistic standards, offering reportage rather than blather and rumor, doing their part to steady a country that still gathers at the tube, not the computer screen, at a time like this. In all this we've been blessed, for there were 48 hours during which the president was scarcely visible or articulate. The country is rooting for Mr. Bush, as it must. We need him to become the president of the America we have now. This means in part a U-turn in style -- more face time with his fellow citizens, less scripted rhetoric from the alliterative phrasemakers who stick pretty words in his mouth (as they did Tuesday night) that sound as if they were written by the same glib stylists who gave him ''home to the heartland'' and ''communities of character.''But style is the easy part. What's more pressing are changes in content. Many of his administration's previous policies are either irrelevant or contrary to a war-bound nation's interests. Education and tax cuts are no longer our top priority. The unilateralism the administration has practiced in walking away from the Kyoto accord on global warming and the ABM treaty is anathema to the building of an international coalition to fight a war. Decisions that are ''the most profound of our time'' (as his handlers described his stem-cell verdict) can no longer be dragged out with weeks of self-aggrandizing spin. But most of all, Mr. Bush will have to prepare the nation for something many living Americans, him included, have never had to muster -- sacrifice. In his pronouncements thus far, the president has expressed sorrow and vowed to ''whip'' evil, but surely he will soon have to prepare Americans to give up far more in  wartime than curbside check-in at the airport. Anyone who lives in New York has seen this week how many Americans are prepared to do this. That's the example our mayor and governor set, and it's the example thousands of New Yorkers have followed with open hearts. Though polls show that we overwhelmingly support the idea of going to war, they don't indicate whether we understand that idea. The killers who attacked us on Tuesday had an all too ruthless eye for appraising how little we knew on Monday. We have no choice now but, as a horror-struck Hamlet said after being visited by the ghost, to ''wipe away all trivial fond records'' from the table of memory, and hope that our learning curve will be steep. Journal

Sealing his standing as America's most passionate and steadfast ally in the fight against terrorism, Prime Minister Tony Blair declared today that Osama bin Laden was responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks and challenged the Taliban leaders in Afghanistan to give him up or ''face the consequences.''''I say to the Taliban: surrender the terrorists, or surrender power,'' said a stern Mr. Blair, addressing a noisily supportive crowd at the Labor Party's annual conference in this seaside town.''In any action,'' he said, ''the aim will be to eliminate their military hardware, cut off their finances, disrupt their supplies, target their troops, not civilians. We will put a trap around the regime.''The prime minister's speech seemed intended as much to herald the beginning of a new world order -- with Mr. Blair somewhere close to its helm -- as it did to address Britons' concerns about their country's role in any forthcoming conflict. Adopting the sweeping style of an international statesman, Mr. Blair spoke of filling the void left by the attacks in the United States through ''the moral power of a world acting as a community.''''This is a moment to seize,'' he said. ''The kaleidoscope has been shaken. The pieces are in flux. Soon they will settle again. Before they do, let us re-order this world around us.''Mr. Blair did not set out how or when Britain -- and any other country that ultimately joins the United States in military action -- planned to attack the Taliban. But his remarks were the most forceful expression yet of his country's commitment to taking the initiative in the efforts to rout Mr. bin Laden and his terrorist networks.''Be in no doubt: bin Laden and his people organized this atrocity,'' the prime minister said. ''The Taliban aid and abet him.''An aide to the prime minister said he had written much of the speech by himself last week. But he and his staff have been in close contact with their American counterparts, the aide said, and it is clear that Mr. Blair's stark, unequivocal language about the approaching conflict had Washington's support. As during NATO's war with Yugoslavia over Kosovo in 1999, Mr. Blair has placed himself firmly at the forefront of what he casts as an alliance opposing tyranny.''This is a battle with only one outcome: our victory, not theirs,'' Mr. Blair said. ''The action that we take will be proportionate, targeted; we will do all we humanly can to avoid civilian tragedies. But understand what we are dealing with. Listen to the calls of those passengers on the planes. Think of the children on them, told they were going to die.''Mr. Blair, who was re-elected to a second term with a huge majority in June, did not explicitly say that his government was committed to toppling the Taliban leadership, but he did imply it. Addressing the Afghan people, he said: ''If the Taliban regime changes, we will work with you to make sure its successor is one that is broad-based, that unites all ethnic groups, and that offers some way out of the miserable poverty that is your present existence.''The underlying theme of Mr. Blair's speech was that the attack on the United States was tantamount to an attack on the world. The concerted effort to combat terrorism, he said, should be matched by an effort to reach greater consensus on a host of issues: fighting poverty, particularly in war-ravaged areas like Afghanistan; investing in Africa -- which he called ''a scar on the conscience of the world'' -- and helping ''breathe new life'' into the Middle East peace process. Diverging from the Bush administration position, Mr. Blair also praised the Kyoto agreement on climate change and said other countries should adhere to it. ''Kyoto is right,'' he said. ''We will implement it, and call on other nations to do so.''Labor Party conferences can be fraught affairs, with critics in the party -- and Mr. Blair's domestic program has many critics -- attacking their leaders at every turn. But Mr. Blair has a reputation for rising to the occasion during foreign crises, and the mood today was almost universally respectful. Capitalizing on this climate of muted deference, Mr. Blair took the opportunity to make the case for various pieces of his domestic program, including spending more money on infrastructure and encouraging greater private investment in public services. Despite the economic downturn, he said, the government would stick to its spending plans, investing rather than cutting taxes. ''For decades, there has been chronic under-investment in British public services,'' Mr. Blair said. ''Our historic mission is to put that right.''The prime minister reiterated his conditional support for a single European currency, stating the unpopular position that if the necessary economic conditions were met, then Britain should join. He also gently introduced the idea that the Labor government would call a national referendum on the euro. Then he returned to his global theme, calling for the world to assert its ''moral power'' as a community.''For those people who lost their lives on Sept. 11 and those that mourn them: now is the time for the strength to build that community,'' Mr. Blair said. ''Let that be their memorial.''A NATION CHALLENGED: BRITAIN

With the United States in attendance but sitting on the sidelines, more than 150 countries begin 12 days of talks in Morocco today aimed at completing the rule book for the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty requiring cuts in gases linked to global warming. The goal of many of the countries at the meeting, in Marrakesh, is to achieve enough consensus on details that the treaty can be ratified and enacted next year, the 10th anniversary of the Rio Earth Summit, where a previous, but voluntary, climate treaty was forged. After that nonbinding agreement failed to achieve reductions in the gas emissions, countries began the protracted talks leading to the binding commitments outlined in the Kyoto accord in 1997. But proponents of enacting the treaty are hampered by two things: persistent disagreements over how to measure gas reductions and levy penalties when a target is missed, and the rejection of the treaty by President Bush last March. Several countries, most notably Japan, have said it would be difficult for them to ratify the agreement if the United States, the largest producer of heat-trapping greenhouse gases, did not join the treaty. Japan plays a pivotal role. Under the complex arithmetic of the treaty, it takes effect only when it is ratified by countries accounting for 55 percent of gas that industrial countries emitted in 1990. Without the United States, almost any combination of nations can reach that level only if Japan goes along. Public opinion in Japan is strongly in favor of the Kyoto treaty, which was drafted on Japanese soil in 1997. But industries there have intensively lobbied against it in recent weeks, Japanese officials said, partly fearing that they would incur costs not shared by American industries if the pollution rules took effect.''Our government thinks that it is extremely important to have one international rule and that every country should act,'' said a senior Japanese environmental official. ''Participation by the U.S.A. is very, very important,'' he said. Japanese officials have met three times with the Bush administration since mid-September to discuss climate change, but not ways to make the treaty acceptable to the United States, officials from both governments said. Mr. Bush and many senators have said that the Kyoto Protocol would harm the economy and unfairly require only the industrial nations to cut emissions, while fast-growing developing countries like China face no such constraints. Administration officials said on Friday that they were attending the meeting only to prevent measures from being adopted that might saddle the United States with indirect costs or create harmful precedents. They said that Mr. Bush's rejection of the treaty was final, but that the administration still planned to pursue other approaches to the problem.''Our position is that climate change is an important issue and one which President Bush has stated we're seriously committed to addressing,'' Paula J. Dobriansky, the under secretary of state for global affairs, said in an interview. There are plenty of other obstacles to enactment of the treaty, with or without the United States, and dozens of parties are affected by the deal. Each country faces a different set of consequences should the treaty take effect. Disagreements over details of the treaty's rules were whittled down significantly at the last bargaining session, held in Bonn in July. But last week, news reports from Europe made it clear that substantial differences still divided important players. Germany, with a government influenced by a strong Green Party, has said no new credit should be granted to countries with vast forests for the role trees play in absorbing carbon dioxide. Russia, in contrast, has pressed for more such credits as a prerequisite for its support. On Friday, without citing Russia, the German environment minister, Jrgen Trittin, told Agence France-Presse that ''it is out of the question to renegotiate, upwards or downwards.''Some countries were still holding out hope that the United States would eventually rejoin the treaty. But experts involved in the negotiations said that attacks on Sept. 11, by greatly boosting the popularity of Mr. Bush, lessened the likelihood that there would be a shift in the American position any time soon.

INTERNATIONALA3-7Israeli Troops Withdraw From Parts of West Bank  Israeli tanks and troops began withdrawing from Bethlehem, despite Palestinian attacks in Israel earlier that killed 5 people and wounded more than 30. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon authorized the pullout, under intense American pressure to end invasions in the West Bank, but indicated through a spokesman that military action would continue in other areas in response to violence. A1China Grooms a New Leader  Hu Jintao, vice president of China, is touring Moscow, London, Paris, Berlin and Madrid for smiles and handshakes with presidents, prime ministers and business titans. But what seems like a common diplomatic trip is filled with meaning, because Mr. Hu appears virtually certain to take over as China's supreme leader in the next 18 months. A3Singapore's One-Party Vote  With one week left before elections, the hapless opposition party has been able to field candidates for only one-third of the contested seats, another reminder that despite its democratic system, Singapore is in practice virtually a one-party state. A3First Reversal at U.N. Court  Appeals judges at the United Nations war crimes tribunal at The Hague overturned the convictions of three Croats linked to an attack on a Muslim village. Some legal experts believe that the ruling, the first time that convictions have been overturned since the tribunal began hearing cases in 1996, may help strengthen its image as a fair court. A7E.T.A. Says it Wants Peace  The Basque separatist group claimed responsibility for recent car-bombings and said that it wanted peace, but only if the governments in Madrid and Paris allowed a vote on independence for the region. The group's statement suggested it is feeling pressure since the war on terrorism and since the Irish Republican Army began to disarm. A7SCIENCE/HEALTHCompleting Kyoto's Rules  More than 150 countries began 12 days of talks in Morocco aimed at completing the rulebook for the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty requiring cuts in gases linked to global warming. The United States is attending the summit meeting, but is sitting on the sideline after President Bush rejected the treaty last March. A7NATIONALA8-9Mexican Border Backups Prompt Criticism of I.N.S.  All across the southwest frontier, where tightened security has driven once-brief crossing times to three hours or more, Americans and Mexicans alike are learning to live with perpetual border backups. Some congressmen say the Immigration and Naturalization Service aggravated the delays by failing to complete a program to replace the outdated migration documents held by Mexicans who routinely cross the frontier with a high-tech card that could allow quick border checks. A8Hiking Into History  Brian Robinson, 40, completed the longest, fastest walk in American history: A 7,371-mile, 10-month hike fueled by 6,000 calories a day. His finish at the freezing, wind-blown summit in Maine that is the northern end of the Appalachian Trail made him the first person to hike, in less than a year, America's three national scenic trails -- the Appalachian, Pacific Crest and Continental Divide. A8Anthrax Is Common on Ranches  More than 1,600 animals have died of anthrax in Texas this summer, the most severe outbreak of the disease since 1987. But no humans have died. Among Texas ranchers, anthrax is just another occupational hazard among many, like drought, low beef prices or coyotes, that can be managed through care and caution. ''There has been anthrax around for as long as there have been people and animals, all the way back to the Bible,'' said Terry Conger, the state's epidemiologist at the Texas Animal Health Commission. A9Harvard Provost  Dr. Steven E. Hyman, director of the National Institute of Mental Health, is expected to resign to become the provost at Harvard University, spokesmen for the institute and the university said. A9SPORTSMONDAYD1-12Diamondbacks Take 2-0 Lead  Arizona defeated the Yankees, 4-0, in Game 2 of the World Series. D1OBITUARIESF7Alvan Feinstein  An epidemiologist who advanced the science of disease diagnosis and prognosis and made significant strides in preventing rheumatic fever, he was 75. F7Vasily P. Mishin  A scientist who helped preside over the Soviet Union's failed effort to beat the United States to the Moon, he was 84. F7NEW YORK/REGIONF1-8New Jersey Candidates Are at Odds Over Schools  Bret D. Schundler is campaigning for governor of New Jersey as the candidate of new, bold ideas, but even by his own standards nothing in his campaign is quite so bold as his proposal to revamp the state's education. Mr. Schundler, a Republican and a supporter of school choice, proposes a program of tax credits to support private school education that he says would save the state almost a half-billion dollars by moving children from high-cost and bureaucrat-heavy public schools to less expensive private ones. His Democratic rival, James E. McGreevey, decries the proposal as ''a scheme that's untested, unproven'' and that could cost public schools $600 million. F1The two candidates clashed over taxes, education, abortion and gun control during an angry fifth debate in which they repeatedly accused each other of lying to the voters. Mr. Schundler, who has been trailing in the polls, also laced two of his remarks with references to the family life of Mr. McGreevey, crossing into territory that is usually considered out of bounds in a political forum. F4Restoration of Weeksville  Four little clapboard cottages in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn are all that remain of Weeksville, one of the nation's earliest communities of freed slaves. Through nearly $10 million in grants they will soon be fully restored and turned into a museum and education center. F1Rabbi Murder Trial  A tantalizing question hovers over the trial of Rabbi Fred J. Neulander of Cherry Hill, N.J., on charges that he arranged the murder of his wife in 1994: Why did an enigmatic member of his temple, Leonard Jenoff, finally confess to the slaying last year and tell prosecutors the rabbi had hired him for $30,000 to rob and kill Ms. Neulander? The jury has heard conflicting explanations for Mr. Jenoff's confession. Which explanation the jury finds more credible will most likely become an important factor in its decision whether to acquit or convict Rabbi Neulander. He could face the death penalty if he is found guilty of murder. F4ARTSE1-8Franzen's Criticism Backfires  Jonathan Franzen's book ''The Corrections,'' one of the most critically acclaimed and best-selling novels of the year, earned him a selection by Oprah Winfrey's book club. But after Mr. Franzen disparaged Ms. Winfrey's literary taste -- suggesting that appearing on her show was out of keeping with his place in ''literary tradition'' and might turn off some readers -- he found that he may have inadvertently damaged his own reputation in the literary world. Ms. Winfrey did not revoke her selection but politely withdrew the invitation to appear on her show. And instead of rallying to Mr. Franzen, most of the literary world took her side, deriding him as arrogant and ungrateful. E1BUSINESS DAYC1-14G.M. Deals Hughes to EchoStar  General Motors agreed to sell Hughes Electronics, the owner of DirecTV, to EchoStar Communications for about $27 billion in cash and stock. The deal, which would combine the nation's two largest satellite television companies, is certain to draw scrutiny from regulators. A1United Airlines Ousts Chief  James E. Goodwin, the embattled head of embattled United Airlines, was removed as chairman and chief executive of the UAL Corporation, United's parent. He will be succeeded by John W. Creighton Jr., the former chief executive of the Weyerhaeuser Company. C1They Removed His Cheese  Executives at Barnes & Noble have decided that ''Who Moved My Cheese?'' and ''Body For Life'' have been on its best-seller list long enough. In an unusual move for a book seller, Barnes & Noble has begun to remove books from its best-seller list after a year. Those two blockbusters were the first to go. C1Aviation Safety System  The wireless technology company Qualcomm intends to announce plans today that it hopes will breathe life into Globalstar Telecommunications, the money-losing satellite company. Qualcomm says it has developed an airborne communications system that can be used to improve existing aviation safety services. C2Nestl  la Mode  The company plans to buy the United States rights to the Hagen-Dazs ice cream brand from General Mills to better compete with Unilever, the world's largest ice cream maker. C6Battle Over Browsers  When Microsoft introduced Windows XP, it also upgraded its flagship Web site, MSN.com, and prompted an outcry by preventing users with certain browsers from viewing the site. At first, Microsoft held its ground, but it later backed down. C2Business DigestC1EDITORIALA10-11Editorials: Mark Green for mayor; more environmental rollbacks; Tina Rosenberg on the resurrection of a Nicaraguan revolutionary. Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert. BridgeE7  TV ListingsE8  CrosswordE2  WeatherF8  Public LivesA8

Talks in Morocco aimed at finishing a pioneering climate treaty headed into a final sprint last night, with negotiators from more than 160 countries haggling over a few important details. If enacted, the treaty, called the Kyoto Protocol, would be the first international agreement requiring reductions in releases of heat-trapping greenhouse gases linked to global warming. President Bush rejected the treaty in March, saying it would harm the economy and unfairly apply only to industrialized countries. The decision put the United States -- the largest source of greenhouse gases -- on the sidelines drew strong criticism from much of the rest of the world. At a summer meeting in Bonn, Germany, a critical mass of participants -- mainly the European Union, Japan, Russia and a group of developing countries -- agreed on almost every element of the accord. After Mr. Bush's decision, European Union officials adamantly vowed to push ahead with completing the treaty. The current round of talks is intended to do just that and is scheduled to end today. To gain legal force, the pact must be ratified by at least 55 countries, including a group responsible for 55 percent of the emissions from industrialized countries in 1990. While European countries have strongly favored the treaty, they needed the support of Japan and Russia in particular to achieve that threshold. Last night, participants in the negotiations said, Russian officials were seeking new credits toward emissions targets for the role that the country's vast forests play in removing the dominant warming gas, carbon dioxide, from the air.  European officials opposed the change. Negotiators said that a compromise between Russia and the European Union was likely, and could be achieved essentially by splitting the difference between the amount of gas credits preferred by each. Russia was seeking a credit of 29.9 million tons of carbon dioxide for its forests, nearly double the 15.4 million tons it had agreed to in Bonn.''There's a strong will to finish,'' a European diplomat involved in the talks said. According to some environmental groups and European officials, Japan, where many industries oppose the treaty, was seeking language that would blunt the accord's teeth. Some critics of the treaty said that it still contained what amounted to an escape clause, in that countries had already agreed to put off for several years the drafting of language to make it legally binding.''This allows Japan and others to ratify the rest of the protocol without fear of it being legally binding,'' said Frank Maisano, a spokesman for the Global Climate Coalition, a group representing American industries that opposed the treaty. But proponents of the treaty defended it, even with its accumulated compromises and the possibility of more. The treaty still represented a big step toward limiting the effects of human activity on the atmosphere, said Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, a group in Washington.

INTERNATIONALA3-14Bush Will Not Meet With Arafat at the U.N.  The national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said President Bush would not meet with the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, at the United Nations this weekend because Mr. Arafat did not appear serious about the war against terrorism. A8Mexico Frees Prisoners  President Vicente Fox ordered the release of two rural ecologists who had been tortured by soldiers and jailed after leading a campaign to stop the destruction of forests in the Pacific coast state of Guerrero. Amnesty International has considered the men prisoners of conscience. A12Argentina Fiscal Talks Falter  President Fernando de la Ra and opposition governors failed to agree on curtailing spending, dealing him a setback just before he left for New York to seek emergency international help to avert a financial collapse. A12Editor Arrested in Zimbabwe  Geoff Nyarota, the editor of the country's only privately owned daily newspaper, was arrested for the second time in less than three months, raising fear of a widening government crackdown on the opposition ahead of next year's elections. A14International Climate Talks  Negotiators from more than 160 countries haggled in Morocco over a few important details in an effort to complete a pioneering climate treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, intended to reduce heat-trapping greenhouse gases linked to global warming. The United States is on the sidelines, a result of President Bush's decision in March that the treaty would harm the economy and unfairly apply only to industrialized countries. A13Deadly Storm in the Philippines  Officials said that a devastating storm ripping through the Philippines' central and southern regions might have killed as many as 350 people, most of them in an area known as Paradise Island. A5World BriefingA6NATIONALA14-24Democratic Stimulus Plan Is Passed by Senate Panel  Democrats pushed their $66.4 billion economic recovery plan through the Senate Finance Committee, 11 to 10. The plan, which sets out their negotiating position on an issue dividing the two parties, expands programs to help the unemployed and offers a tax rebate for low-income people and tax breaks for some businesses. A24Deal on Ballot Overhaul  House Republicans and Democrats reached agreement on a bill to overhaul the nation's election system. A18Suicide Law Back in Force  A federal judge temporarily blocked Attorney General John Ashcroft's move this week to overturn Oregon's law allowing assisted suicide. A16Oil Refinery Plan Blocked  The religious broadcaster Pat Robertson had his plan to turn crude oil into gasoline for charitable purposes stymied by a federal judge's order. The judge has sided with residents in Santa Fe Springs, Calif., who oppose restarting a refinery bought by Mr. Robertson in 1998 with $20 million from a charitable trust. A16EDUCATIONDrugs and After-School Activity  The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether public schools may require students to pass drug tests as a condition of participating in extracurricular activities. A16NEW YORK/REGIOND1-13Bloomberg Reaches Out To Powerful Union Leaders  Mayor-elect Bloomberg met with leaders of two of the city's most powerful municipal unions, seeking to build ties with officials who will be important players in dealing with the city's mounting budget problems. The move also offered a sharp stylistic difference with the man he is succeeding, Rudolph W. Giuliani. A1Questions on a SUNY Contract  State Comptroller H. Carl McCall released an audit citing improprieties in a SUNY contract with James M. Copeland, an architect who owns Hudson Design and who has close personal ties to Governor Pataki. D1Inquiry Into Baby's Death  The commissioner of the Administration for Children's Services, Nicholas Scoppetta, detailed the extensive case history of Sylena Herrnkind, 3, whose parents are accused of killing her. Mr. Scoppetta promised a top-to-bottom inquiry into how his agency had dealt with the family. D1Kerik's Jarring Discovery  Police Commissioner Bernard B. Kerik, 46, said that in researching a memoir he learned that his mother, who abandoned him as a child, was a convicted prostitute who died in 1964 from a massive blow to the head. He suspects a pimp killed her. D1Neediest CasesD12OBITUARIESC12-13Rose Shapiro  President of the New York City Board of Education during the stormy times of the late 1960's, she was 97. C13WEEKENDE1-28; E29-42SCIENCE/HEALTHFewer Choices for Workers  Thousands of employees are having to drop their health plans and choose new ones as companies cut back their rosters of H.M.O.'s and other managed care insurers. C1BUSINESS DAYC1-14Slow Going in Early Trade Talks  International trade officials are still deadlocked on several core issues -- farm trade, antidumping rules and textiles -- on the agenda of global talks that begin today in Qatar. C1Enron's Suitor Undeterred  Enron sliced more than half a billion dollars from its reported profits over the last five years, but its crosstown rival, Dynegy, still appeared willing to acquire Enron, executives said. C1Bid to Avert Europe Recession  The European Central Bank and the Bank of England cut interest rates by half a percentage point. C2Stocks End Nearly Unchanged  The Nasdaq lost 9.76 points, to 1,827.77; the Dow rose 33.15 points, to 9,587.52; and the S.& P. 500 edged up 2.74 points, to 1,118.54. C6Business DigestC1World BusinessW1SPORTSS1-7EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: A homeland pep talk; up from Seattle; Brent Staples on flags. Column: Thomas L. Friedman. CrosswordE42  TV ListingsE27  Public LivesD2  WeatherS2

With momentum building for a treaty curbing global warming, delegates from 164 countries negotiated late into the night in Morocco on Friday. With momentum building for a treaty curbing global warming, delegates from 164 countries, cloistered in a convention center in Morocco, negotiated late into the night yesterday to resolve several lingering disputes. If completed and enacted, the treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, would set the first firm restrictions on the amount of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases released by industrialized countries.''We're in a state of hard negotiations, with everyone delivering a huge effort to find an agreement,'' said Vincent Georis, a spokesman for Olivier DeLeuze, the head of the European Union delegation, in a telephone interview from Marrakech. The outlook for the treaty was substantially dimmed in March when President Bush rejected it, reversing the position taken by President Bill Clinton, whose administration negotiated the outlines of the accord in Japan in 1997. The United States, with 5 percent of the world's population, accounts for a fourth of all emissions of the so-called greenhouse gases, mainly carbon dioxide. Still, climate experts and government officials said that even without participation from the United States, adoption of the treaty would be a small but significant first step toward limiting the human impact on the atmosphere.''If this holds together, it is a piece of architecture in place and it is quite an achievement to get this far,'' said Dr. Henry D. Jacoby, co-director of the Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Most climate scientists say that a buildup of greenhouse gases in recent decades has contributed to a worldwide warming trend that could lead to droughts, floods and agricultural disruption, particularly in developing countries. The treaty aims to introduce the first global trading system for greenhouse gas credits. The system would allow countries that surpassed targets for reducing emissions to sell extra credits to countries that lagged, creating an incentive to make the deepest cuts wherever they could be done at the lowest cost. But big issues remain, Dr. Jacoby said, especially the challenge of fostering international environmental and economic cooperation without the United States -- the biggest economy and polluter.''How will we proceed when we have a fragmented system with us and perhaps others on the outside?'' he said. ''How does that evolve?''A series of compromises, particularly between the European Union on the one hand and Russia, Japan, Canada and Australia on the other, cleared the way for a final push last night, according to some environmental experts. Remaining issues included how much credit Russia should get toward its emissions goals for the role its vast forests play in absorbing carbon dioxide. Europe, the bloc most firmly fighting for the treaty, still differed with Japan over whether countries should first be required to accept the treaty as legally binding before they could buy and sell emissions credits. Another issue involves Saudi Arabia and other oil exporting countries that want compensation for any lost revenue should countries reduce their use of fossil fuels. Even with this workload, many delegates and observers said last night that they felt confident they would find agreement by today. The goal of many negotiators was to settle on language that satisfied enough countries to enact the treaty next year, the 10th anniversary of the Rio Earth Summit, where the first climate treaty was forged. To gain legal force, it must be ratified by at least 55 countries, including a group responsible for at least 55 percent of the heat-trapping emissions from industrialized countries in 1990. If that happens, the treaty will require by 2012 that participating industrialized countries cut emissions of carbon dioxide and similar warming gases about 5 percent below their levels in 1990. With the United States on the sidelines, the support of Japan and Russia is crucial for ratification. The Kyoto Protocol was framed as a successor to a 1992 climate treaty -- signed by Mr. Bush's father and approved unanimously by the Senate -- that set voluntary goals for greenhouse-gas reductions by industrial powers, but failed to come close to its target. The Clinton administration sought to complete the treaty last year, but talks at the Hague last November fell apart. The issue then fell to Mr. Bush, who had long questioned the science pointing to human-caused global warming and was heavily lobbied by energy companies to reject it outright. When he did reject it, he said the pact could harm the economy and was unfair because the required emissions cuts applied only to industrial powers and not to fast-growing developing countries.

After four grinding years of negotiations, the final details of a treaty aimed at fighting global warming emerged from talks in Morocco on Saturday. After four grinding years of negotiations, the final details of a pioneering treaty aimed at fighting global warming emerged from talks in Morocco yesterday, and many large industrial countries, excepting the United States, said they were likely to ratify the agreement. If enacted, and significant hurdles still must be crossed for that to happen, the treaty, called the Kyoto Protocol, would set the first binding restrictions on releases of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases by industrial countries. President Bush rejected the treaty in March, limiting its reach by putting the United States, the largest source of such gases, on the sidelines. At the time, the decision caused some other countries, most notably Japan, Canada, Russia and Australia, to hesitate. But after two weeks of discussions in Marrakesh among this group, along with developing countries and the European Union, the treaty's strongest proponent, agreement was reached on a set of compromises.''The Kyoto Protocol is saved,'' Olivier DeLeuze, head of the delegation from the European Union, said after the deal was announced. Negotiations were far tougher than those producing every other past international environmental treaty, officials of many governments said, because cuts in these emissions will come mainly from restricting the burning of coal, oil and other fossil fuels, the underpinning of industrial economies. The industrial countries that sign on will be required, as a group, to cut emissions by 2012 to levels about 5 percent below emissions levels in 1990. That shared target will be easier to achieve, in part, because Russia and some other countries, after the collapse of Communism, saw emissions drop far below 1990 levels. As happens to most international agreements, the treaty lost some of its initial vision over years of negotiation between blocs of countries that would be affected differently by its terms. For example, Russia, Canada and Japan sought and gained substantial credit toward their gas targets for the ability of their forests to absorb carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas. In telephone interviews yesterday, American officials at the meeting gave no sign that the Bush administration would reconsider joining the effort. ''Other countries have chosen their path, and our answer is still no,'' said a senior member of the American delegation. Some of Mr. Bush's critics in the Senate, most notably James M. Jeffords of Vermont, chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee, criticized the administration's lack of an alternative to the treaty. He said that Washington ''refuses to take responsibility for its share of the problem.''Most climate scientists say that a buildup of greenhouse gases has caused at least part of the world's warming trend that could lead to droughts, floods and agricultural disruption. Mr. Bush has said that the Kyoto pact could harm the American economy and was unfair because developing countries like China and India were excused from any obligations to make emissions cuts. In a statement delivered at the closing ceremonies, Paula J. Dobriansky, the under secretary of state for global affairs, said the Bush administration was still committed to solving the problem, but in its own way and at its own pace. ''Climate change is a serious issue that requires real action,'' she said. Nonetheless, the completion of the treaty -- even without the United States and with various compromises -- still represented an important moment in industrial history, environment experts said. After a century of growing use of fossil fuels with little regard for the impacts of a steady buildup of greenhouse gases, many experts said, this is the first global mechanism for limiting such environmental harm.''It's by far the strongest environmental treaty that's ever been drafted, from the beginning to the end, from the soup of measuring emissions to the nuts of the compliance regime,'' said David D. Doniger, the director of climate programs for the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private environmental group.''The parties have reached complete agreement on what's an infraction, how you decide a case and what are the penalties,'' said Mr. Doniger, who attended the meeting. ''That's as good as it gets in international relations.''Another innovation in the treaty is its unfettered trading mechanism for greenhouse-gas emissions. Until last summer, the European Union, driven by strong public sentiment, had staunchly opposed allowing a country to get credit towards its emissions targets by investing in cheaper pollution cleanup projects overseas. But under pressure from Japan, Canada and Russia, that opposition faded in Marrakesh, negotiators said. The goal of such trading is to foster international markets for energy-efficient technologies, treaty supporters said.''The Marrakesh results send a clear signal to business, local governments and the general public that climate-friendly products, services and activities will be rewarded,'' said Michael Zammit-Cutajar, a United Nations official. To gain legal force, the treaty must be ratified by at least 55 countries, including a group responsible for at least 55 percent of the heat-trapping emissions from industrial countries in 1990. With the United States out, that threshold can be achieved only with the support of both Japan and Russia. Russia gave strong signals yesterday that it was satisfied. In a statement made before the meeting closed, Aleksandr I. Bedritsky, the lead negotiator from Russia, said the agreement ''opens the path for the ratification by all countries, including the Russian Federation.''Representatives of Japan, where industries are fighting the pact, were more circumspect. That hesitation is natural because Japan -- under the arithmetic of the treaty -- will have to make significant cuts in emissions domestically to reach its target, said Dr. Richard L. Schmalensee, dean of the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Europe is in a better position to meet its targets because it benefits from the large cuts in emissions that already occurred in Britain and Germany for economic, not environmental, reasons. The Europeans took credit in Marrakesh for leading on the issue. Many officials at the meeting said that Mr. Bush, who is dedicated to building and maintaining an alliance against terrorism, was missing an opportunity to seek an international approach to the environment. Dr. Schmalensee said the main benefit of the treaty was not the modest cuts in emissions it set, but the mechanisms and institutions it would create. ''It'll build some engagement and the habit of compliance,'' he said. ''This is a first step.''

President Bush said that responsibility for fighting terrorism is "binding on every nation with a place in this chamber."President Bush tried to cast the war against Osama bin Laden and the Taliban in the broadest global context today as he told the United Nations that every member country was a potential target of terrorism and that responsibility for fighting it was ''binding on every nation with a place in this chamber.''In a blunt, direct speech that was his first to the General Assembly, Mr. Bush said that the time for offering only condolences to the United States for the Sept. 11 attacks had passed. He said that each member nation now had a duty to crack down on terrorist financing within its borders and the responsibility to share intelligence information and coordinate law enforcement.''Every nation has a stake in this cause,'' Mr. Bush said. ''As we meet, the terrorists are planning more murder, perhaps in my country or perhaps in yours.''To add critical support to his words, Mr. Bush announced tonight that the United States was providing an aid package worth more than $1 billion to Pakistan in exchange for Pakistan's support of the war in Afghanistan. But it was unclear whether that aid included $500 million already announced by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in Islamabad in October, and Bush administration officials were unable last night to provide details. Gen. Pervez Musharraf, the military president of Pakistan, responded at a joint news conference with Mr. Bush at the Waldorf-Astoria that he saw the ''dawn of a new era of a relationship between Pakistan and the United States.'' Administration officials said that the two leaders did not discuss in meetings today the release of American F-16 fighters sold to Pakistan in the 1980's. For the first time, Mr. Bush directly evoked Mr. bin Laden's own words to warn and compel the United Nations to act. Referring to a videotape of Mr. bin Laden broadcast on the Jazeera television network last weekend, Mr. Bush said that ''they called our secretary general a criminal and condemned all Arab nations here as traitors to Islam.''Mr. Bush warned that Mr. bin Laden and his terrorist network would use chemical, biological and nuclear weapons as soon as they were able to do so.''No hint of conscience would prevent it,'' Mr. Bush said. ''This threat cannot be ignored. This threat cannot be appeased. Civilization itself, the civilization we share, is threatened.''Mr. Bush also said more emphatically than he ever has before that  there should be a Palestinian state, and for the first time referred to that state with the name the Arabs use themselves. ''We are working toward the day when two states --  Israel and Palestine -- live peacefully together within secure and recognized borders,'' Mr. Bush said. The use of ''Palestine'' seemed intended to appeal to an Islamic public that has grown uneasy and impatient with the war in Afghanistan. The president's speech opened two days of intense diplomacy to enlist more support for his war against terrorism. Mr. Bush was among more than 40 world leaders planning to address the General Assembly's annual general debate, which was delayed for the first time in the organization's 56-year history because of the September attacks. Despite its frankness, much of Mr. Bush's speech was delivered with a plain-spoken eloquence that avoided any references to Mr. bin Laden as ''the evil one,'' a favorite phrase of the president when he speaks to American audiences.''A few miles from here, many thousands still lie in a tomb of rubble,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to the site of the World Trade Center's collapse in Lower Manhattan. Mr. Bush said that he and United Nations officials would visit the site on Sunday where the names of every nation and region that lost citizens -- more than 80 at last count -- would be recited.''If we were to read the names of every person who died, it would take more than three hours,'' Mr. Bush said. The United States, he added, will never forget Sept. 11. Mr. Bush, who as a presidential candidate disdained the ''nation building'' of the Clinton administration, again outlined his administration's plans for reconstructing a post-Taliban Afghanistan. ''The United States will work closely with the United Nations and development banks to reconstruct Afghanistan,'' Mr. Bush said. The address was a dramatic change from the kind that Mr. Bush had been expected to give had the United Nations not postponed its General Assembly meeting in late September because of the terrorist attacks. Before Sept. 11, diplomats said Mr. Bush would have been the unilateralist on the defensive, a president who had walked away from the Kyoto accord on global warming and who had threatened to withdraw from the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. Mr. Bush's address seemed to affirm a new faith in multilateralism. Nonetheless, the speech was not interrupted by applause. Neither was the speech of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani at the United Nations in October. The reaction to Mr. Bush's speech ranged from positive to restrained. Jack Straw, the British foreign minister, called it a ''very tough, positive speech with a very clear message,'' but a delegate from Zambia, Lazarous Kapambwe, said he would have liked the president to address problems in addition to terrorism. ''The world is moving on,'' Mr. Kapambwe said. ''There are deaths that are occurring from diseases, from H.I.V., from poverty.''The Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, who attended a United Nations lunch with Mr. Bush and other world leaders, called the speech ''important, positive and constructive.'' Last week the White House said Mr. Bush had no plans to meet with Mr. Arafat in New York. The speech was delivered in an atmosphere of extraordinary security, taken because Mr. bin Laden had singled out the United Nations and various world leaders in a videotaped message broadcast last weekend by the Arab language television network Al Jazeera. In that message, Mr. bin Laden called Secretary General Kofi Annan a ''criminal'' and said that ''the United Nations is nothing but a tool of crime.'' Intelligence analysts said that the United Nations was a target, not only in New York but also throughout the world. White House officials promoted the address as a ''fleshing out'' of what they call the Bush doctrine --  the assertion first made in a speech by Mr. Bush on Sept. 21 to a joint session of Congress in which he said that nations that harbored terrorists were just as guilty as the terrorists themselves. As in that speech, Mr. Bush did not name names. But the United States has previously identified a number of nations it says give safe haven to terrorists, including Iraq, Syria and Somalia. In his address today to the General Assembly, General Musharraf assured the gathering that his country's nuclear arsenal was in good care.''Let me assure you all that our strategic assets are well guarded and in safe hands,'' he said. Asked at the news conference with Mr. Bush about Mr. bin Laden's claim that he possesses nuclear and chemical weapons, General Musharraf said he doubted it. A NATION CHALLENGED: THE PRESIDENT

INTERNATIONALA3-22Negotiators Finish Details Of Pioneering Climate Pact  The final details of the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty aimed at fighting global warming by restricting releases by industrialized countries of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases, emerged from talks in Morocco. Many large industrial countries said they were likely to ratify the agreement, including Japan, Canada, Russia, and Australia, which had hesitated after President Bush rejected the treaty last March. A8Australian Leader Re-elected  Prime Minister John Howard, who took a hard-line stance against illegal immigration and emphasized his support for the American-led war against terrorism, won a third term in national elections that focused on security and immigration issues. His Liberal Party won 67 seats of 150 seats in Parliament; the rival Labor Party won 65 seats. A15Somalia Faces Terror Charges  Somalia's weak government has vowed to root out terrorism and says it takes seriously American allegations that fundamentalists inside Somalia have aided Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda network. Still, the country is not persuaded that its struggling citizens are secretly planning attacks against the United States. A3Details on Peru Spy Chief  The Bush administration may soon disclose secret details of the relationship between the Central Intelligence Agency and Peru's powerful former spy chief, Vladimiro L. Montesinos, after President Alejandro Toledo requested their release. Mr. Montesinos remains a threat to Peru's fledgling democracy, Mr. Toledo said in an interview. A4NATIONALA24-36Some Animal Rights Groups Are Stepping Up Protests  Many mainstream animal rights organizations have scaled back their activism since Sept. 11, but more radical groups have not. In recent weeks they have firebombed a federal corral for wild horses, raided a mink ranch and set fire to a primate research laboratory. A24Republican Governors Convene  At their annual gathering, the nation's Republican governors tried to put the best face they could on last Tuesday's elections, in which Democrats reclaimed the governor's offices in Virginia and New Jersey. A24San Francisco Tourism Declines  Tourism has been hit hard in San Francisco, first by a softening economy and then by fears of terrorism, which increased after a warning by Gov. Gray Davis. A24Early Novel by Black Woman  A manuscript, unpublished for more than 140 years, is the earliest known novel by a female African-American slave and probably the earliest known novel by a black woman. A1Democrats Seek Advantage  Democrats are on the attack in the House and the Senate, sensing that a sagging economy will help them in next year's elections and that they can paint Republicans as insensitive to distress. A32NEW YORK/REGIONA39-47Shadow of 70's Crisis Hangs Over City Again  A combination of the slowing economy, the collapse of the dot-com bubble and the impact of the attacks on the World Trade Center has raised the specter of New York City enduring another period of austerity much like that of the 1970's, though comparisons are elusive. A1City Will Drop Charges  Charges against all but one of the firefighters arrested during a raucous demonstration at ground zero on Nov. 2 will be dropped, city officials said, in a gesture to help restore the close relationship forged between police officers and firefighters in the wake of the Sept. 11 terrorist attack. The move comes in the midst of a continuing struggle between firefighters and the city over how many firefighters should be permitted at the World Trade Center site to help search for the remains of their colleagues, 343 of whom died in the disaster. A41Neediest CasesA44OBITUARIESA47-48Ken Kesey  The well-known author of ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'' and the hero of Tom Wolfe's famous nonfiction book about psychedelic drugs, ''The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test'' which helped make him a charismatic symbol of the 1960's, he was 66. A47Dr. Marian Fischman  A scientist who explored narcotics addiction by paying addicts to take heroin and other drugs, she was 62. A48ChessA45  WeatherA49

In the continuing debate over global warming and how to fight it, some scientists and entrepreneurs advocate using the oceans as a sponge to absorb carbon dioxide from the air. In the continuing debate over global warming and how to fight it, some scientists and entrepreneurs advocate using the oceans as a sponge to absorb carbon dioxide from the air. Others are saying not so fast. They argue that widespread ocean dumping of carbon dioxide could unbalance the aquatic environment. Carbon dioxide is one of the ''greenhouse gases'' that trap heat. Most scientists believe that carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels is a large factor in the warming temperatures of the last century and that capping those emissions is essential for limiting future warming. Much of the extra carbon dioxide already dissolves into the oceans, where it has no effect on temperatures. Two schemes seek to augment that natural process. One is to catch carbon dioxide from the smokestacks of power plants before it enters the atmosphere, squeeze it into liquid form and then pump it into the deep oceans. The other is to fertilize oceans to produce blooms of algae that pull carbon dioxide out of the air. Proponents believe that as the bloom dies off, much of the algae will sink to the ocean floor, and the carbon dioxide -- transformed into plant material -- would be safely subtracted from the warming equation. A private company called GreenSea Venture hopes to make a business of this. But some scientists argue that engineering nature to avoid environmental damage inevitably causes other, perhaps greater damage. Writing in the Oct. 12 issue of Science, Dr. Brad A. Seibel of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in Moss Landing, Calif., and Dr. Patrick J. Walsh of the University of Miami caution that carbon dioxide could harm deep-sea creatures. Enshrouded in perpetual cold and dark, these creatures like the anglerfish live in slow motion, their metabolisms consuming energy at as little as one-thousandth the rate of those closer to the surface. The slow metabolism makes them particularly sensitive to chemical changes in their environment, the authors say. When carbon dioxide dissolves, it turns into carbonic acid, making the water more acidic. But biologists have observed that a change of 0.3 in the pH level in the blood of some deep sea creatures can halve the amount of oxygen. ''It may not kill them,'' Dr. Seibel said, ''but they may not be able to swim as actively as they could be before. It'd be like they were out of breath.''Damage to deep-ocean ecosystems could eventually alter the mix of nutrients and chemicals that well up from the depths. ''It's still not known what the links between the deep ocean and the shallow ocean are,'' Dr. Seibel said. ''If you damage one, you hurt the other potentially.''A small-scale experiment to pump about 40 tons of liquid carbon dioxide into the waters off Hawaii has run into stiff opposition from some environmentalists and has not received final approval. Carbon dioxide does kill, as researchers demonstrated in even smaller-scale experiments this year in Monterey Bay. From a small submarine, the scientists, from the Monterey Bay Research Institute, squirted about five gallons of liquid carbon dioxide into each of several small plastic pools at the bottom, 12,000 feet down. They then put cages containing five sea urchins and five sea cucumbers each about a foot and a half from the carbon dioxide pools, wanting to see how they fared compared with others in cages farther away. When they returned three weeks later, everything in the cages next to the pools was dead. The researchers found that creatures like small crustaceans living in the nearby sediment were also injured or killed. Modifying the experiment, the researchers then placed sea urchins and sea cucumbers 6 and 15 feet away from the carbon dioxide. Those animals survived without visible injury; tissue samples are being examined for cellular damage.''It seems CO2  injection will have detrimental effects,'' said Dr. James P. Barry, an associate scientist at the institute involved in the experiment. ''That's almost certain. The degree of damage is the question.''These cautionary notes contrast with the views of Dr. Peter G. Brewer, a senior scientist at the research institute, who supervised the bay bottom experiments and has advocated exploring the idea of injecting carbon dioxide in the ocean. Still, he said the data deserved a full airing.''Just as putting in a sewage outfall or drilling an oil well, there's an environmental question to be asked,'' Dr. Brewer said, ''and people should do it in an objective way.''In a second Science article on Oct. 12, three scientists -- Dr. Sallie W. Chisholm of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Paul G. Falkowski of Rutgers University and Dr. John J. Cullen of Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia --  strongly criticize the idea of fertilizing to counter global warming. Some parts of the oceans, primarily in the Southern Hemisphere, are full of nutrients, but sparse in sea life because of a lack of iron. Several small experiments have shown that dumping iron into these waters produces large blooms of algae. Proponents like Dr. Michael Markels, who founded GreenSea Venture, say the proposal simply mimics a natural process, in which iron-rich dust and volcanic ash blow from land to water. ''It would be minuscule in comparison to what happens naturally,'' Dr. Markels said. But Dr. Chisholm contends that it is difficult to measure how much carbon sinks and that the algae blooms could suck oxygen out of the water, chasing away fish and that a profit motive would lead to reckless overfertilization.''It's like saying: 'What's so bad to adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere? There's already CO2  in the atmosphere,'' she said. The GreenSea approach has not yet received widespread support, with the Department of Energy turning down its grant proposals. GreenSea's business plan also depends on the selling of ''carbon credits'' proposed under the Kyoto treaty on global warming. The Bush administration has rejected the Kyoto treaty and has also objected to the concept of carbon credits.

The night of Oct. 15 found Colin Powell inside the heavily fortified residence of the American ambassador in Islamabad, dining with his improbable new best friend, the president of Pakistan. Just a few months earlier, when the Bush administration was beginning to compose its tableau of friends and foes, a Powell deputy was sent to court India, a democracy and possible counterweight to China, as America's darling in South Asia. Pakistan was passed over as a terrorist-cradling rogue nation. But war changes everything, and Gen. Pervez Musharraf was now our partner against the terrorists in neighboring Afghanistan. This was Powell's first face-to-face meeting with the Pakistani strongman, and he was impressed with what he found. Like Powell himself, Musharraf was a pragmatic military man, brimming with self-assurance, equally at ease talking tactical soldiery or political strategy, a man given to thinking three or four steps ahead. Powell was in Islamabad to reassure the Pakistanis that the United States would not, as it had in the past, abandon Pakistan once the war was over and to proffer some tangible rewards, including an end to sanctions imposed to punish Pakistan's nuclear testing and help in rescheduling a staggering national debt. This was a gamble for Musharraf, enlisting with America against a viral Islamic hatred incubated, among other places, in Pakistan. The streets were simmering with angry protests. As a precaution against a stray shoulder-fired missile, Powell had ended his 17-hour flight with a lights-out, banking dive into the Islamabad airport. And for security reasons, the dinner was not listed on the schedule handed out to his traveling press entourage. The Secret Service bodyguards were not the only ones feeling twitchy about the visit. Twice, as the two business-suited generals huddled over their meal, cellphones trilled -- first in the pocket of the Pakistani head of intelligence, then in that of the C.I.A. station chief -- with news that India was firing artillery in the disputed border province of Kashmir. Now India was feeling jilted. ''It's a way of saying, 'What about us?''' said one member of the Islamabad dinner party. Such is the volatile, expedient new world of American foreign policy in which Colin Powell presides. And for now at least, he does preside, his comforting charisma, his ally-charming skills and his experience of war all placed at a premium by the terror attacks of Sept. 11. When I interviewed Powell in a more innocent time, four days before the hijack kamikazes hit the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, I asked him to describe his vision of the world. (Powell has compiled a list of maxims he likes. No. 11 is ''Have a vision.'') The answer he gave was an articulate and utterly uncontroversial discourse on an America that would lead by the power of its example -- a riff that paid effusive homage to Ronald Reagan's ''shining city on a hill.'' Except for a somewhat heavier foot on the pedal of free markets than you might have heard from a Democratic administration, it was uplifting, nonpartisan boilerplate and seemed to confirm what just about everyone who has worked with Powell says about him, that he is a problem solver, not a visionary. Six weeks later, when we talked over Diet Cokes on his plane home from his swing through southern Asia, the world had delivered up a whopper of a problem, and he was in his element. Wars, even this ''war,'' relieve you of the quest for a great organizing principle and direct your attention to the practical business of strategy and tactics. And so Powell had been working the world, mustering a coalition of old friends, fair-weather friends and former denizens of the Bush doghouse, amassing real and moral support for a campaign against terror. This time when I asked Powell for the big picture, the issue that demanded his most careful attention in the rearranged world, he plunged into a discussion of the uncertain stability of nuclear-armed Pakistan, a country about as far downhill from Reagan's shining city as you can get. The campaign against terror has created the kind of crisis-management world in which Powell thrives. Before Sept. 11, Powell was the lonely hope of European allies, Congressional centrists, global business and most of the media commentariat to the left of The Weekly Standard, who viewed him as the adult in a mosh pit of moralists and America-firsters. ''In the land of the blind, he's the one-eyed king,'' said a prominent Democrat shortly before the terror attacks. Since the dawn of a common international cause, though, the Bush administration has been sounding more like Colin Powell than like anyone else. The terrorists have, for now, disarmed the lone-superpower ideologues within the Republican Party and created a sense of global common purpose in which trust among competitive nations seems a little more plausible. The way Powell puts it is that the attack on America ''hit the reset button'' on foreign policy. Tense American relationships with Russia and China and even in the intractable Middle East, he says, now seem more amenable to breakthroughs. He contends that America has not only moved, at long last, beyond the cold war but has also vaulted past the ''post-cold-war period,'' that confusing interim search for purpose in a world without a center of gravity. With the rout of the Taliban from Kabul and other cities and, in the same week, halting steps toward a new strategic bargain with Russia, the new Powell doctrine of diplomatic opportunity seems all the more plausible. Whether it survives the frustrations of imposing stability in Afghanistan -- which could mean, among other things, winning a guerrilla war -- or the ultimate test of our allies' competing self-interests remains to be seen. You can find many within the administration and outside it who believe that the Powell view is nave or amoral in a dangerous world. But one man who appears to share Powell's fresh sense of opportunity, who talks about the world with the same tone of bright promise, is President Bush. On Sept. 11, Powell was sitting down to breakfast in Lima with Alejandro Toledo, the president of Peru, when an aide handed him a note saying that a plane had hit the World Trade Center. ''Oh, my God,'' he said to his host. ''Something terrible has happened.'' It would be 10 hours before he could get through to President Bush, who was being ferried around the country by a nervous Secret Service. Until that point, the conventional wisdom about Powell was reflected in an end-of-summer Time magazine cover that asked, ''Where Have You Gone, Colin Powell?'' The new secretary of state had endured a series of minor humiliations -- over North Korea, over the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, over the American peacekeeping commitment in the Balkans. Moreover, he seemed invisible, which in Washington is taken to mean impotent. ''We've had our little hiccups,'' he said a couple of days after that issue of Time appeared. Even by then, however, Powell's influence had been steadily growing. He had negotiated a relatively unacrimonious end to the administration's first international crisis, the collision of an EP-3 spy plane with a Chinese fighter, opening the way for a less prickly relationship with China, which President Bush has now embraced. He had reassured the Europeans that despite the Bush camp's belittling talk of nation-building in Bosnia and Kosovo, the Americans who went in with the allies would not leave without them. Bush had, almost impetuously, abandoned his campaign suspicion of Russia. And despite the administration's scorn for Bill Clinton's personal diplomacy in the Middle East, the president had agreed in a National Security Council meeting, the conclusions of which were later artfully leaked, to reaffirm American support for Palestinian statehood and authorize a more active American role in the region. In all of this, the president was following the instincts of his secretary of state. By Friday, Sept. 14, when Powell helicoptered to Camp David for dinner with Vice President Cheney, Defense Secretary Rumsfeld and Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, crucial preparations for war were already under way. Powell's most trusted deputy, Richard Armitage, had already called in the Pakistani intelligence chief to lay the foundations of a military squeeze on Afghanistan. Armitage, a Vietnam vet with a bodybuilder's imposing bulk, was once decorated by the government of Pakistan for helping arm Afghan rebels in their insurgency against Soviet control. Now he delivered a seven-point, with-us-or-against-us ultimatum calling on the Pakistanis to close their border with Afghanistan, open their intelligence files and provide access for American forces. The Pakistani diplomat left and returned the next day with Musharraf's unqualified concurrence, and Powell cinched it in a phone call to the Pakistani leader. The bombing was still three weeks away, but the group that gathered at Camp David quickly came to the conclusion that the American response would be military and that it would be careful and methodical.''There is always the pressure to go back and smack somebody right away,'' Powell, who likes to quote Thucydides on the military virtue of restraint, told me the following week. But, Powell went on to say, the question was ''who that somebody was, one, and how to do it so that you were hitting that someone or some group and not just hitting for the sake of hitting.''Over dinner, the foursome kept the conversation light, but the next morning they were joined by the president, George Tenet, the C.I.A. director, and an array of deputies in a Camp David conference room. For four hours they turned over the options, the risks, how to make the declared war more than a figure of speech. They ran through the Soviet experience in Afghanistan, the genesis of the Taliban, the question of how far to trust Pakistan. They talked about whether the initial phase of the war should extend beyond Al Qaeda to target terrorist groups with popular backing in the Middle East, like Hamas and Hezbollah, and whether it should encompass sponsoring states -- Syria, Iran and especially Iraq.''What was kicked around at Camp David was, You have a lot of other countries in the world that support terrorism,'' said one participant. ''What are we going to do about them? Obviously there's Al Qaeda and there's Afghanistan, but we don't want to send a message that there's good terrorism and bad terrorism. You know, you can't be against Al Qaeda and then support Hezbollah.''Powell pointed out that there was no evidence connecting Iraq to the Sept. 11 attacks. Others said that that was irrelevant, that the administration came to power promising to do more to bring about an end to Saddam Hussein. Powell said the coalition would not hold if the United States targeted Iraq, and without the coalition there could be no shutting off of terrorist finances, no intelligence sharing, no international arrests. After a lunch break, when Bush asked the cabinet principals to sum up their views of the discussion, there was general agreement that Afghanistan and Al Qaeda would be plenty for the first stage. The next day, back at the White House, the president called in Rice and said that he had made up his mind. Iraq was left for the future.''Iraq will be sitting there after this campaign is well along,'' Powell told me a few days later. ''Iraq isn't going anywhere. It's in a fairly weakened state. It's doing some things we don't like. We'll continue to contain it. But there really was no need at this point, unless there was really quite a smoking gun, to put Iraq at the top of the list.''With respect to what is sometimes characterized as taking out Saddam,'' he added, ''I never saw a plan that was going to take him out. It was just some ideas coming from various quarters about, Let's go bomb.'' He said raining bombs on Iraq would be no more effective now than it was when President Clinton did it in December 1998. ''What was the result of the bombing? He's still there, except you put him back on Page 1. 'Here I am!' And you've spent a billion dollars. So, we'll take that in stride, in sequence. He'll be there, unfortunately, a week, a month, two months from now.''For Powell's Republican critics inside and outside the administration, Iraq remains the nagging test of whether this war should or will be fought on his terms, and it is a battle postponed rather than resolved. When and if President Bush becomes convinced that he should attack Iraq, Powell will hew loyally to the policy, but so far he doesn't see the point. On the plane back from Asia last month, I asked if he had seen anything to change his mind about targeting Iraq. He said he had not. I asked about the mission that James Woolsey, the former director of central intelligence, had recently undertaken to gather evidence of an Iraqi role in the twin towers attack. Powell was clearly irritated. Woolsey ''wasn't working for me,'' he said. ''All I know is what I read in the newspapers. And I assume he's doing something for the Pentagon.''Powell's most vociferous critics trace his reluctance to go after Iraq now to his role in the gulf war, when he was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It is, they contend, a continuation of an earlier mistake that Powell refuses to admit. It is true that the advice Powell gave the first President Bush after Iraq invaded Kuwait was consistently cautious. As documented by Michael R. Gordon and Gen. Bernard E. Trainor in their meticulous account of the war, ''The Generals' War: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf,'' Powell opposed using ship movements to send Saddam a signal of American resolve, a reluctance some say emboldened the Iraqi leader to move against Kuwait. (The man who advocated moving ships toward the Persian Gulf to deter an invasion was Paul Wolfowitz, then under secretary of defense.) Powell advocated a longer period of economic and political sanctions before sending troops. He at first wanted the focus to be on defending Saudi Arabia rather than on liberating Kuwait. Based on what proved to be overgenerous Pentagon estimates of Iraqi strength, he insisted that the war could be undertaken only with half a million troops. And in the end, after the Iraqi Army had fled home, he recommended ending the war after five days, although (as intelligence would later show) half of Saddam's lethal Republican Guard had escaped with its tanks back into Iraq, where they would help crush Shiite and Kurdish uprisings and assure Saddam's hold on power. Powell feared that bombarding the retreating Iraqis along the so-called Highway of Death would make America seem brutal, and President Bush agreed. This record persuades conservatives that Powell was too fainthearted. William Kristol, editor of the conservative Weekly Standard, wrote in late September in The Washington Post that the first President Bush went to war against Iraq over the resistance of Powell, and he challenged the current president to do likewise. I put this complaint to former President Bush, who sent back a furious written reply.''Kristol said Powell opposed the use of force,'' he wrote. ''That is a vicious slander, totally untrue. I valued Colin's opinion that when force was needed we'd use sufficient force to keep our casualties to a bare minimum. . . . That Colin did not want to use force is a grossly unfair, insupportable lie.''As for the contention that Powell persuaded the president to stop short of neutering Saddam Hussein, the former president wrote: ''Our mission was to end the aggression and kick Saddam out of Kuwait. My commanders told me, 'Mission accomplished.' I ended the fighting. For the reasons I have often stated, I have no regrets that we avoided changing the mission. I admit that based upon the opinion of all our coalition partners I did feel Saddam would flee Iraq or be killed given the magnitude of his defeat. All of us underestimated Saddam's cruelty and brutality to his own people, which keeps him in office.''Powell himself concedes a little bit of ground. ''You can reasonably argue that we should have gone for another day or two,'' he told me. ''We would have destroyed more tanks, we would have killed more people, we would have lost more lives, there would have been more destruction along the Highway of Death. But we weren't going to Baghdad. And so when you read things, as I read in an article not too long ago, that Powell insisted on keeping Saddam Hussein in place in Baghdad, that gets my dander up. It's like I'm some Rasputin figure that was all alone causing all this to happen or not to happen.''Administration officials will tell you that the philosophical differences between Powell and his colleagues are exaggerated. One White House official scoffed at what he called the MTV ''Celebrity Death Match'' version of policy-making that comes across in news accounts. Rice, whose job is to protect against internecine conflict, insists, ''It's actually a very collegial national security team, and it's rare that we even go to the president with some split decisions.'' It is true that since Sept. 11, differences have been muted, and with the National Security Council meeting often and the cabinet principals gathering every evening, Bush's advisers seem to have grown quite comfortable with one another. But while the division has been bridged for now, relegated to the sniping of deputies and surrogates in the press, it is a real fault line that runs through the administration, and it could open again. On one side is a neoconservative school that flowered in President Reagan's first term, before he fell in love with arms control. Those in this group tend to see the world in darker tones. They are suspicious of treaties and alliances that constrain American power and generally unsentimental about humanitarian interventions where explicit American interests are not at stake. But they harbor a pronounced sense of America's moral obligations, reflected most powerfully in a devotion to beleaguered democracies like Israel and Taiwan (and for some of them during previous administrations, Bosnia). This group includes Defense Secretary Rumsfeld and his deputy, Paul Wolfowitz -- who half-joked around the time he accepted the job that the reason he enlisted in the new administration was to keep an eye on Powell -- and a number of outside advisers they have assembled at the Pentagon. The group includes Vice President Cheney, who has been an important sponsor of Powell but who as defense secretary during the gulf war sometimes jousted with Powell over what he saw as the general's foot-dragging. Rice, while she has settled rather successfully into the national security adviser role of honest policy broker, is at heart more impatient with make-nice diplomacy than Powell. The second group reflects a more traditional Republican foreign policy of the kind that prevailed under the first President Bush -- comfortable with alliances, treaties and international institutions, less assertive in the promotion of American values abroad, more Realpolitik in its judgments, more ''sandpapered'' in its language, as one aide put it. Powell is the standard-bearer for this camp, which includes most of the upper ranks of the State Department and some sympathizers in the White House, along with an outside chorus that notably includes the president's father. Since Sept. 11, any frictions have tended to occur at the margins of policy, and they have been played out through deputies putting their spin into briefing papers and whispering to sympathizers in the press. Powell says that the cabinet is ''in full accord'' on the conduct of the antiterror campaign. He is particularly sensitive about any suggestion that he imposes himself in the Pentagon's business; aides say that he confines his advice to occasions when the president or vice president ask for it. Powell slapped down as ''absolute nonsense'' reports by Rumsfeld sympathizers in the press that he had dictated a go-slow approach to the early bombing in Afghanistan. ''I know enough not to do something I used to do for a living when there's somebody else better qualified than me to now do it,'' he told me last week. Powell himself has not spent all those years in the executive branch without becoming adept at close bureaucratic combat. His in-fighting style is patient and discreet. He gives his interviews on the record, so he cannot be accused of badmouthing rivals, except implicitly. (Asked about reports of some jostling with Rice for influence, Powell firmly denied it, then added that he regarded the national security adviser ''like a daughter,'' which was probably not meant to sound condescending but left no doubt about who was the alpha dog.) Powell has plenty of loyalists in the government and Congress who are willing to get more personal. A recent flurry of press reports that characterized Wolfowitz, the Pentagon deputy, as a right-wing zealot -- shrewdly not aiming at Rumsfeld himself -- was helped along by Powell supporters in the administration and on Capitol Hill. Powell is careful not to undercut a presidential decision, but he is willing to put forward spin on a policy before the president has formally staked a position. When the first Bush administration was wrestling with the question of whether to intervene in Bosnia, Powell gave an impassioned interview to this newspaper on the folly of intervention, which those who favored air strikes viewed as bordering on insubordination. Last month in Shanghai, he gave a speech to business leaders that was, by several degrees, more optimistic about the benign direction of China's leadership than President Bush has been. Those who have worked with him say that Powell is usually the best-prepared person in any meeting and has anticipated the arguments several steps out. He can draw on experience of every war since Vietnam. There are seven seats on the National Security Council, including the president and vice president; Powell has held three of them.''He's a smart linear thinker, with iron self-control, tremendous pride and self-confidence, great leadership skills, great presentational skills, limited analytical skills and a commanding presence,'' said a diplomat who has sparred with Powell. ''It's an amazing package.''Plus, there is the aura. The decorated warrior. The intimate of, now, four presidents. The man many felt could become the first African-American president. His story of accomplishment is the subject of more than 20 books, including his own best-selling memoir. None of this is likely to awe men of comparable experience, like Cheney and Rumsfeld, but it cannot fail to impress a president with none of those credentials. At some level, generally obscured by Powell's competence and charm, the fact that he is black contributes something to the chemistry. There is the crude fact that a popular black war hero is politically invincible in a Republican administration that won without a majority. And there is a more subtle sense that his achievements make white Americans feel a little better about themselves, and a bit more open to Powell. Those who work with him tend to shy away from the subject of his race, but Powell has thought about it a good deal. He has said that his descent from blacks of the West Indies, where slavery ended earlier than in the United States and where the mixing of African and European bloodlines was more common, gave his people a greater self-assurance than descendants of American slaves. That was reinforced in the comparatively meritocratic world of the Army. He is light-skinned, with the ethnically neutral voice of a television anchor and an inviting face, which the writer Henry Louis Gates Jr. described as having ''a sort of yearbook openness.'' This makes him an easy man to be around. As he told Gates in a remarkably candid series of interviews for The New Yorker: ''One, I don't shove it in their face, you know? I don't bring any stereotypes or threatening visage to their presence. Some black people do. Two, I can overcome any stereotypes or reservations they have, because I perform well. Third thing is, I ain't that black.''Rice, who as a black woman may know even more than Powell about the sting of stereotypes, said that the one time ''others tried to energize'' the issue of race against Powell was when the administration chose to spurn the United Nations conference on racism in South Africa. Articles appeared speculating that Powell, who has a fascination with Africa, wanted to go. In fact, Rice said, the president left the decision to Powell, who saw the conference dissolving into an Israel-bashing session and chose not to attend. Both Powell and Rice were said to be disturbed by the significance race took on in the matter.''Still got your voice, Andrea?''A dozen reporters dragged themselves onto the State Department plane home from Shanghai to find Powell presiding over the press seats, tending his entourage. Andrea Koppel, the ailing CNN correspondent, nodded that she was still fit to file.''That's too bad,'' Powell said, smiling, and ducked forward into his cabin. He would be back after a few hours' sleep, changed into his traveling uniform of crisp white T-shirt and blue-and-green windbreaker, for a stand-up briefing that would range from the details of China's nuclear deterrent to developments in Israel, managing the seasoned briefer's trick of breaking no news while not sounding canned. For a man who decided, after a long and public introspection in 1995, that he did not have the stomach for campaign politics, Powell is nimble at the parts of his job that resemble campaign politics -- the flattering wisecrack, the command of detail, the much-repeated answer that sounds fresh and the ability to be alert when everyone else is fall-down tired. All of this has served him during the accelerated diplomacy of assembling a war coalition, which is a little like playing chess on 20 boards at once against challengers with wildly differing opening gambits. There are the Europeans, who came to the antiterror campaign as volunteers and require consulting but no persuading. One thing the Europeans want from Powell, though, is assurance that the United States is doing what it can to defuse the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and Powell calls regularly with reports on his conversations with Prime Minister Sharon, Foreign Minister Peres and Yasir Arafat. He does the same with Saudi Arabia, one of the few countries where Powell's contacts from the gulf war are still in power. Japan is another story. The Japanese are being courted to help in the reconstruction of Afghanistan after the war, but they also want to be talked to about the military aspects because they see themselves emerging as more than just a one-dimensional economic power. Powell obliges. He has met the Russian foreign minister, Igor Ivanov, 13 times and speaks with him routinely to discuss counterterrorism and the full menu of issues. More delicately, using his policy-planning deputy, Richard N. Haass, and working through multilateral committees, Powell has tried to draw Iran into the antiterrorism effort. The Iranians have been helpful in the distribution of food to refugees and have agreed to provide search-and-rescue help if American war planes run into serious trouble in Afghanistan. The United States wants them to use their influence to help assemble a broad alternative government in Afghanistan. To support him in all of this, Powell has brought back to life a neglected and demoralized instrument: the State Department. Under previous administrations, the State Department has watched its power be siphoned off to political operatives in the White House and places like the Treasury Department, its network of trained diplomats eroded, its facilities starved and mismanaged. From Powell's first day at the State Department, his reliance on the career Foreign Service has been a rejuvenating tonic to an institution that had felt marginalized. Powell has filled many of his key assistant-secretary jobs, the people who oversee the six regions of the globe, with career Foreign Service officers, to whom he has delegated the kind of authority a general gives to his division commanders. Whether by design or not (Powell's people insist not), this has had the additional effect of assuring that those jobs would not go to White House political appointees whose views were to the right of his own. The business of management rarely engages secretaries of state, but it is an obsession in the modern American military -- developing and motivating talent, delegating authority while holding subordinates to account, dispensing praise and trust in exchange for loyalty and hard work, tending to morale. One retired general who worked closely with Powell recalled his arrival as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He inherited a ''Joint Staff'' of two-star and three-star generals assigned by -- and loyal to -- the individual services. They reported to him through a tightknit outfit called the Chairman's Staff Group, which filtered and homogenized the conflicting advice of Air Force and Army. His first day on the job, Powell called in the Staff Group and said: ''Here's the drill: You're out of it.'' Thereafter, he took his information directly from the bright officers assigned by the services, bolstering their loyalty to him and assuring a flow of unvarnished information. State Department insiders say that Powell operates much the same way with dissenters inside his department. A notable example is John Bolton, the under secretary of state for arms control and international security, who is an ardent hawk whose appointment Cheney lobbied for. Rather than isolate Bolton, whose views on Russia and arms treaties are considerably to the right of his own, Powell uses the under secretary to test and sharpen his own thinking.''Washington players can be divided into those who know how to work the institution and those who don't,'' said the retired general. ''Madeleine Albright didn't. Rumsfeld, in his first months, didn't. Powell plays the institution like a damn orchestra.''The restoration of the State Department has, of course, only elevated the alarm of hawks, who see the career Foreign Service as a bastion of overpolite cookie-pushers and status-quo pragmatists. For all his towering reputation and managerial gifts, Powell started in his job with two serious operational handicaps. He was not an intimate of the new president, and he was viewed with mistrust by the unilateralists who seemed to have custody of the unschooled president's worldview. New presidencies often start out as extensions of the campaign war room, driven by the glib convictions of the debate briefing book and powered by the loyalties tested in the heat of political combat. Compared, for example, with Condoleezza Rice, who had been the candidate's foreign-policy tutor and spent her weekends grafted to the president's side, or to Dick Cheney, Powell had not really been there. Powell spent the campaign year giving speeches at $75,000 apiece, promoting his program for poor kids, America's Promise, and savoring a life beyond his official duties -- a wife he reveres, a hobbyist's devotion to tinkering with old Volvos, a reading list that extends beyond the daily intelligence digest. His most conspicuous role in the Bush campaign had been a speech at the Republican convention in Philadelphia, in which he scolded the party for being insensitive to the condition of minorities. The speech played well at a gathering designed as a showcase of inclusiveness, but it compounded the doubts of party zealots that Powell was a Republican in his soul. Powell's son, Michael, a free-market Republican who is chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, said his liberal friends find it hard to believe that his father, an African-American centrist who supports affirmativeaction and abortion rights, could feel at home in the Republican Party. ''They say, 'He's not really one of you, right?''' And a fair number of Republicans undoubtedly feel the same way, that he's not really ''one of us.''''For the bulk of his career he did the kind of things that are relatively politically agnostic,'' said Michael, whose own Army career was cut short by a near-fatal car crash. ''Even when there was contemplation he'd run for president, the biggest speculation was, As what? I mean, what greater accolade to a soldier than, You don't even know his politics?''For Powell, membership in the Republican Party is less a matter of theology than of style and loyalty to the political mentors who promoted him, beginning in the Reagan administration. He likes the discipline, the respect for authority and tradition -- and, of course, the party's support of the military -- more than the conservative social agenda, the chest-beating unilateral streak or the distaste for government. ''What we both are, is moderates,'' his son said. Powell's temperance in affairs of state matches an instinctive caution honed in a meteoric military career that depended heavily on the patronage of admiring, mostly Republican, civilians. He has never been a boat-rocker, although along the way he has occupied some boats that wanted rocking. As military assistant to Reagan's defense secretary, Caspar Weinberger, for example, he acquiesced in a White House scheme to sell missiles to Iran in the hope of liberating American hostages; his conduct brought him a mild rebuke from the independent counsel -- and a promotion. His old mentor Weinberger sums up Powell this way: ''Colin is quintessentially a good soldier. He does his duty and carries out orders.''Like many soldiers of his generation, Powell took from Vietnam, along with two wounds and a chestful of decorations, a disillusioning lesson in the politics of war, a determination not to agree to what he called ''halfhearted warfare for half-baked reasons.'' In 1984, when he was Weinberger's military aide, he was impressed by a speech the defense secretary gave articulating a series of tests a commander in chief should apply before using military force. During the Balkan conflict, when Powell was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a reporter for this newspaper compiled these guidelines and labeled them the ''Powell Doctrine.'' In brief, it calls for the use of force to be clearly synchronized with political ends and for force to be applied decisively. (Powell has used the word ''overwhelming,'' though he now disavows it.) The doctrine does not specify that wars should be quick, low-casualty and popular, but it certainly smiles on such wars. Powell says that he has always regarded his rules as guidelines, not dogma -- a safeguard against wars, like Vietnam, that demoralize the country and damage American prestige. He argues that the people he calls ''Kmart parents'' -- working-class Americans who tend to be the parents of soldiers -- should understand why their children are being put at risk and should never doubt that the country will back them to the hilt. His rules for the application of force have been maligned by more interventionist critics, liberal and conservative, as an excuse for inaction.''He is exceedingly cautious,'' said an official who, like everyone with aspirations of influence, refused to criticize Powell for the record. ''Cautious to the point where he will reject audacious options, even well-considered ones.'' When asked about this, Powell retorted: ''Caution is not a vice. I think it's a virtue. I know when to act. And if caution is such a terrible vice, then I'm sure the various people I've worked for over the years probably would not have hired me.''The most controversial application of the Powell Doctrine was in Bosnia, where Powell's aversion to committing American force was outspoken and adamant, verging on coldhearted. Powell worried at each step that ostensibly limited American involvement -- airdrops of food and medicine for Bosnian Muslims, air strikes against Serbs -- would lead inexorably to a deep and bloody American involvement. He seemed to sense something ordained by history in the war of Muslims and Serbs. He approvingly quoted Bismarck's remark that all the Balkans were not worth the life of one of his soldiers. Powell's reluctance matched the sentiment in the first Bush White House, where President Bush was running a difficult re-election campaign against a public sense that he was too preoccupied with foreign policy. Powell still had eight months to serve as chairman when President Clinton came to office, fresh from a campaign in which he excoriated Bush for sitting by while Serbs slaughtered Muslims in Bosnia. But the new president's attention was on health care and the economy, and his national security team was haunted by ghosts of the Vietnam entanglement. Madeleine Albright, then the ambassador to the United Nations, and James Woolsey, the C.I.A. director, argued for intervention, but they were outnumbered, and overshadowed by the impressive figure of Powell. There is a famous encounter between Powell and the Clintonites that gets recounted with different emphasis depending on who is doing the telling. The president's foreign policy advisers were agonizing over Bosnia, Powell arguing as usual that only a large ground force could change the behavior of the Serbs and that it was hard to envision a political goal for which the public would support the risk of American lives. Those who favored intervention recount with relish Albright's outburst: ''What's the point of having this superb military that you're always talking about if we can't use it?''Supporters of Powell are more likely to recall his reaction, unvoiced but noted in his autobiography: ''I thought I would have an aneurysm. American G.I.'s were not toy soldiers to be moved around on some sort of global game board.''But the revealing contribution came from Anthony Lake, the national security adviser, reflecting the disposition of an administration cowed by history: ''You know, Madeleine, the kinds of questions Colin is asking about goals are exactly the ones the military never asked during Vietnam.''Powell left the government at the end of September 1993, but he continued to argue that Bosnia was ''baffling,'' insoluble and in any case not worth the risk of American lives. Although Bosnia today is, by virtue of NATO intervention, at peace, Powell says that he has no regrets about opposing military involvement. President Clinton declined to be interviewed for this article, and several officials in his administration would not be quoted by name on the subject, but there is a lingering bitterness that Powell is not held more accountable for the Clinton administration's retreat from its campaign promises on Bosnia. Clinton has also long fumed that Powell did not share the blame for the fiasco of Somalia, where 18 American commandos were killed in a misguided mission in 1993. Powell had reluctantly advised Clinton to order in commandos to help hunt down a warlord bedeviling an American-led humanitarian effort. Their deaths and desecration became a paralyzing symbol of the folly of well-intentioned foreign entanglements. The angriest I have seen Powell was when I broached the subject of Somalia as we flew back from Asia. He surged forward in his seat, and I thought of what Michael Powell had told me about growing up with his father: ''I don't think I have any memory of ever being spanked or hit, but he could scare the bejesus out of you. He just had to be mad. It was enough.''''I know what he says,'' Powell snapped, referring to Clinton, and then he began a smoldering account of how the situation in Somalia, almost inevitably, unraveled. The details of the sad climax are arguable, but they are peripheral compared with the bigger blunder, which was not Powell's doing: allowing an effort to feed starving Somalis to evolve into a campaign to introduce democracy where there was nothing but clan warfare. As Powell is well aware, the war on terrorism strains his ideal of clear objectives and decisive commitments. The war is unconventional and likely to become more so as the Taliban retreat into the mountains. The broader declared purpose of making the world inhospitable for terrorists is murky and open-ended. But as one administration official put it: ''If you deconstruct the so-called doctrine into a set of questions, they are still important questions, and they're the questions Powell will keep asking: What, exactly, is the objective? Have we brought the right resources to bear? What happens next?''That Powell now seems to be in tune with the president should not be so surprising. Apart from his more ideologically ardent handlers, Bush has always seemed to have an essentially optimistic temperament and an instinctive trust in personal relationships and in the ability of reasonable people to work things out. The issue on which Powell has worked hardest to close a gulf between himself and the president is Bush's apparently devout belief in missile defense. Before the antiterror campaign, the issue of missile defense was the single most important test of how the Bush administration would balance the new primacy of unfettered American self-interest against a pragmatic respect for the rest of the civilized world. The intramural debate on that issue continues, and it is as good a window as you can find into how Powell thinks and how he operates. In the months of deliberations leading up to Vladimir Putin's inconclusive visit to the president's ranch in Crawford, Tex., Powell was the most forceful voice for a compromise on missile defense that would allow American testing to proceed without demolishing the scaffolding of arms-control agreements. Like many career soldiers, Powell has always been a skeptic about wizard weapons that promise to make warfare antiseptic, simple and safe. He likes his advances in military technology incremental and tested. In his view, civilian leaders who put their faith in smart bombs and high-altitude air power usually end up sending divisions of soldiers to die finishing the job. Powell's suspicion of missile defense was nourished at its genesis, President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, which the young Pentagon aide watched with a kind of amused horror.''Reagan, God bless him, was forever talking about this shield and, you know, We're just going to make all offensive weapons useless,'' Powell recalled, rolling his eyes. Powell saw antimissile technology at the time not as a utopian dream but as a useful way of throwing a scare into the war planners of the Soviet Union. Once U.S. negotiators had placed missile defense on a back burner as part of a deal cutting nuclear arsenals on both sides, Powell was happy to let it revert to a low-priority research project. Fifteen years later, Powell says that the technology is more plausible and well worth advanced testing. What he has in mind is not a missile-tight umbrella of defenses in space, but sea-based rockets that might intercept a nuclear missile soon after launch and installations on American territory that might stop a missile as it descends. Powell invariably refers to ''limited'' missile defense, a phrase the president has now adopted. Powell is wary, though, of making missile defense the tail that wags the dog of foreign policy.''One can argue whether you should give it this amount of attention, this amount of passion, and give it the foremost position on your agenda,'' Powell told me in September. If the United States can calculate a way around the A.B.M. treaty, which prohibits advanced testing, then ''it's just another defense program that will go into a more routine level of development without the kind of attention it's now getting.''The argument within the administration has focused on exactly how to get around the A.B.M. treaty constraints. Rice and others at the Pentagon and in the White House wanted to drop the A.B.M. treaty altogether as a demonstration that America accepts no artificial limits on its national interest. They have argued that amending the treaty would entail a time-consuming ratification battle in the Senate and that even something less than a formal amendment -- a Russian side letter promising not to challenge certain tests -- would give the Russians too much leverage. Powell's first preference is for an amendment to the treaty, which would assure the full blessing of Congress and avoid controversy he said the president didn't need. Failing that, he said he would be content with a less-formal understanding that certain specific tests were O.K. -- an agreement the Russians have so far balked at providing. The important thing, he said, was to avoid abandoning the treaty altogether, with the probable high price in Russian, European and Congressional good will. He argued that a concession to the Russians on the formalities of the A.B.M. treaty would be more than repaid in other ways -- their acquiescence in the expansion of NATO, the continued reform of their economy and, of course, their cooperation in the war against terror. Powell is sympathetic to their anxieties.''The one thing that scares them -- and I'd be scared if I were them, and we've got to figure out a way to deal with this: 'Powell, we love you like a brother. We don't care what the magazines in Washington say, we think you're great. But you'll be gone one day. Putin will be gone. Bush will be gone. Igor will be gone. And we will have made some kind of a deal now, and, great, it's a limited defense. Well, one day another president comes in, and he decides: ''I'll replicate it. I'll clone it. I'll geneticize it.'' And it goes from being a limited defense to: POW! Reagan's back. How do you persuade us that's not going to happen? We can't do this on the basis of personal relations. It has to be on the basis of our national interest over time.''' Which means, Powell said, ''You codify it somehow.''A good argument you get on the other side, probably from Condi, is: 'Let's just do what we think is right. We really don't have to be bound up in the legal documents like we used to be with the Soviet Union.' We will see.''Powell paused and pursed his lips in a grim smile. Referring to the Russians, he said: ''You could just say, 'The heck with you.' I would rather not.''Won't the Russians get over it if we decide to go it alone?''They may get over it,'' he replied. ''But they also will be under no constraints as to what they might do in the future.''Given Powell's stature -- Senator John McCain calls him ''the most popular person in America'' -- and the uncertain state of the vice president's health, there's considerable curiosity about whether Powell would ever revisit the question of higher office. What if, for example, Cheney's heart troubles were to recur and President Bush invited Powell to become vice president -- meaning a campaign role in 2004 and considerable pressure to run for president in 2008, when he would be 71? I asked this question of everyone I interviewed who was close to Powell, and the reaction was almost universally dismissive. The attacks of Sept. 11 have certainly not diminished the powerful fears of his wife, Alma, that as a candidate Powell would be a target for every kind of madman. And Powell seems to have come to terms with his own visceral reluctance.''Absolutely not,'' said Richard Armitage, probably Powell's closest friend in government. ''He's slept soundly from the time he made the decision on it. He said at the time: 'On mornings when I woke up and thought, I'm going to run, I felt terrible, it was a terrible day. On mornings I got up and said, I'm not going to, I had a wonderful day. And I finally came to realize, with all these people telling me, You have to run, they were looking for a shortcut, they wanted someone on a white horse. That's not the way our system works.'''Powell's son, Michael, said it was ''very, very doubtful'' that his father would revisit the question, having ''resolved it in a pretty fundamental way.''''But, and I guess this is an important but, he does have a sort of consummate commitment and love of service and serving the country,'' he continued. ''In the extreme, if the country was at war, if there were the kind of challenges with which he could come to grips, if there was some reason he was the right person for the right time -- I do think it would have to be some element that rose to that level in his mind to entice him to do it.'' That was the week before we declared ourselves at war. If Powell wants a larger job, though, he need only stay put. Because now, with the rapid advances of anti-Taliban forces in Afghanistan, it gets really complicated. In a phone conversation last week, with the Taliban collapsing, Powell cited his own scripture: ''By Powell Doctrine standards, you keep your eye on the political objective, which is Osama bin Laden and the Al Qaeda network.''But among the things Powell has committed America's diplomats to do, even before the military work is fully accomplished: help assemble a Muslim-led peacekeeping force in Afghanistan and then a reasonably stable, polyglot government without precedent; repay and reassure the government of Pakistan; try to defuse the explosive border dispute in Kashmir; and calculate a new relationship with the highly problematic government of Iran. He also appears set to inject himself, and possibly President Bush, in the cynics' nest of what America now freely calls Palestine. Powell will probably be spending a lot more time with yet another longtime coddler of terrorists, Yasir Arafat, and with yet another problematic general, Ariel Sharon. And the minute the Afghan phase of the war on terror seems near an end, he may again have his hands full maintaining that other troublesome coalition, the Bush administration. Bill Keller is a columnist for The New York Times and a senior writer for the magazine.

Imagine for a moment that you're a citizen of Tuvalu, an island nation in the South Pacific. Your home will soon disappear beneath the waves, an early casualty of rising sea levels linked to global warming. The people largely responsible for your plight -- the oil-burning, carbon-dioxide-spewing citizens of the United States -- are thousands of miles away and show no signs of lending a hand. What do you do? A growing number of environmental advocates, alarmed by the Bush administration's repudiation of the Kyoto Protocol, have this advice: take 'em to court. The idea of filing lawsuits to recover damages from emissions of carbon dioxide is the brainchild of Andrew Strauss, a professor of law at Widener University in Wilmington, Del. In a controversial paper delivered this summer at a conference in London, Strauss explored the ''litigation possibilities'' for filing suit against the United States. Though Strauss is the first to admit that there are serious obstacles to bringing such a case, the mounting evidence that global warming is a real and present danger has lent momentum to his idea. There are plenty of candidates for the role of plaintiff: countries as diverse as Bangladesh, the Netherlands and China will suffer if sea levels rise. But as Strauss notes, finding aggrieved parties won't be a problem; what will be difficult is finding a court willing to take the case. After all, it's not clear what court would have jurisdiction over such a novel proceeding. International law is famously complex and has never handled anything on this economic scale. Nevertheless, Strauss has a few proposals. One promising avenue, he thinks, would be for the plaintiff nations to file a case before the International Court of Justice, the legal arm of the United Nations. There's only one hitch: typically, the court can hear the case only with the assent of the accused nation. More promising, perhaps, is for the General Assembly to ask the U.N. court for an ''advisory opinion,'' a decision that is not legally binding but would give environmentalists a public-relations victory. The battle over global warming, Strauss explains, ''is a battle in the court of public opinion, so such a decision would strengthen your negotiating position.''Another option is to force the United States before the World Trade Organization. Countries that abide by the Kyoto Protocol could argue, with some legitimacy, that the cheap-energy policies of the United States constitute an unfair competitive advantage. Affected countries could then impose so-called countervailing duties on goods made here. The U.S. would then have to go before the W.T.O. to try and have the duties removed, forcing a potentially embarrassing hearing that might not work out in its favor. Strauss doesn't expect immediate success. ''There will be different generations of this litigation as it unfolds,'' he says. But as the world becomes increasingly entwined with international legal tribunals, courts and binding treaties, it may one day become difficult for one country to wreak environmental havoc on the rest without paying a price. Should that come to pass, no country -- not even America -- will be able to live as an island unto itself. Stephen MihmTHE YEAR IN IDEAS: A TO Z.

Across the Northeast, people opened their doors yesterday to discover something unfamiliar: a chill in the air. Weeks later than usual, temperatures have finally descended into something like their normal late-December range. The cold snap followed an autumn in which sidewalk cafes stayed open into December, golf courses were packed with plaid and the first World Series game ever played in November felt more like May. The unseasonal curveball that the weather threw at the calendar affected almost everyone, for better and for worse. Varel Bailey, a cattle and pig farmer in Anita, Iowa, has been spending 5 percent to 10 percent less on grain because cattle eat less when it is not cold. In New Mexico, Ski Santa Fe, a snow-starved resort, had to postpone its planned Thanksgiving Day opening to Dec. 8, and even now has less than half its skiing areas open. In the natural world, daffodils bloomed, and the grass at the New York Botanical Garden was a lush green the week before Christmas. In Pennsylvania, a baby killdeer hatched in December instead of April. And in Massachusetts, Bill Davis, a state wildlife biologist, came home from a deer station one recent day with a sunburn.''It's global warming, dude,'' said Pito Robles, 28, an auto mechanic who on Thursday was dangling his fishing line into the Hudson River near West 66th Street in Manhattan. ''I don't care if the whole planet burns up in a hundred years. If I can get me a fish today, it's cool by me.''In fact, the warm spell that settled over much of the nation this fall may not be caused by global warming, the gradual but potentially calamitous rise in worldwide temperatures that most scientists attribute, at least in part, to fuel-burning human activities like making electricity and driving. When burned, fuels release carbon dioxide and other ''greenhouse gases'' that trap heat in the atmosphere. The fall weather could have been a fluke, climatologists agree, because in the short run weather often does unanticipated things. But the unusually balmy fall seems to fit at least two longer-term patterns. One is that the weather has become significantly more erratic and variable, and that is likely to continue, scientists say. Another is that the warming trend is destined to continue. This year is expected to be the second warmest on earth since 1860, when temperatures were first measured systematically. Nine of the 10 warmest years have occurred since 1990. And one of the world's leading forecasting agencies, the Hadley Center for Climate Prediction and Research in Britain, says there is a 75 percent chance that next year will be even warmer than this year. So far, the results of global warming in North America seem to be a mix of good and bad. Since 1960, New England has seen the last hard freeze come a day earlier every three years, extending the growing season. But in the Middle Atlantic and the South, shores are receding as seas, slowly raised by melting glaciers, eat away at coasts. And Alaska, where warming has been most pronounced, is undergoing a host of changes. Glaciers are receding, permafrost melting, shrubs spreading across previously barren tundra. The start of the Iditarod dog race this year had to be moved north because the trail near the usual starting point was too mushy. But the growing variability of the weather may be as troublesome as the warming. This weekend, after a mittenless fall, temperatures are plummeting quickly across the country. And the prospect of a sudden, sustained cold snap is making many people uneasy. Will birds that delayed their ritual migration be trapped up north by frigid weather? Will buds that bloomed in December's warm chicanery burst their pipes and suffer winter damage?''The party is almost over for people who like warm weather,'' said Jon B. Davis, a meteorologist for Salomon Smith Barney in Chicago. ''Wednesday's 49 degrees in Chicago was probably the warmest we will see until late March. We are headed into a major-league cold pattern.''Labor and IndustryEven if this winter is about to earn its reputation, the fall's warm weather has made its mark -- economically, environmentally and in other ways. It has been a boon to workers at the site of the World Trade Center disaster. Joe Bradley, the foreman of a crew of machine operators struggling to clear rubble at ground zero, said the mild weather allowed them to clean up the site quickly and to recover bodies they might not have otherwise found.''It gave us an opportunity to get the bulk of the work done,'' Mr. Bradley said. ''It was a gift from God, a real miracle.''Economically, the warm spell has cut both ways, benefiting some industries while hurting others. Warm weather, it turns out, may get people out of their houses, but not necessarily into stores. Foot traffic may have increased, retailers say, but people tend to window-shop. And they are not buying the winter supplies that stores have stocked. As a result, retailers have slashed prices on things like coats, scarves and gloves.''Warm weather is not good for retailers,'' said Scott Bernhardt, senior vice president in charge of retail research at Planalytics, a consulting firm in Wayne, Pa., that provides long-range weather predictions and marketing advice to retailers. ''A winter like this hurts because retailers don't plan on it.''Snow shovel sales are down about two-thirds for the 7,200 hardware stores in the TruServ cooperative in Chicago, said Ray Winkel, its director of inventory management. But snow blowers are selling well. ''Unlike snow shovels, they are not an impulse purchase, and people remembered what a tough winter last year was,'' Mr. Winkel said. And other industries are clearly benefiting from the warmth. Scott Arves, president of Schneider National in Green Bay, Wis., the huge trucking company known for its orange fleet, said the mild weather had resulted in hundreds fewer accidents, lower maintenance costs and on-time delivery rates rare in late fall and winter, when a single storm can delay 1,000 Schneider trucks. Warm weather has depressed demand for natural gas, and, partly as a result, prices have fallen sharply -- to $2.60 per million B.T.U.'s of gas to be delivered next month, from $10 last winter. That has helped consumers in the upper Midwest, where gas provides 90 percent of the home heating energy. In agriculture, the warmth has generally been welcome. Livestock farmers can buy less grain, not only because cows eat less in warm weather but also because breeding stock can stay out in the fields longer to forage. Grain farmers can expect to pay less for fertilizer, because natural gas is a major component. In states like Florida, rising temperatures may change growing patterns. A 1989 freeze pushed the citrus belt south, said Jim Lushine, a National Weather Service meteorologist, but warmer weather may have the opposite effect. ''We could see a return, a northward shift in some of the growing climates in Florida,'' he added, ''and that might actually prove to be a boon for some people.''Flora and FaunaSome plants and animals have reacted to the warm cycle as if it were a false spring. Spring peepers are calling, woodpeckers and ruffed grouse have been drumming, said Mr. Davis, the wildlife biologist. More ticks seem to be active late into the year, he said. And in Montana, the Bitterroot Valley has been alive with butterflies that would normally be hibernating. Most birds that migrate over long distances are not affected by the warmth because they would already have been in the tropics by September. But other species, like ducks and geese, which migrate shorter distances, have stayed north. Two calliope hummingbirds were first spotted at Fort Tryon Park in Manhattan about a month ago, when they would ordinarily be in Mexico, and were still at the park last week. The birds that have stayed north could suffer if a sudden cold snap causes ponds and lakes to freeze, making food unavailable for several days, said Dr. Jeff Price, director of Climate Change Impact Studies for the American Bird Conservancy. Deer may actually benefit from the warmth. The deer population got winter coats on time, but then was less active and consumed fewer calories because of the higher temperatures, Mr. Davis said, adding, ''This sends them into winter in better condition to survive.''Many plants may not do as well. At the New York Botanical Garden, Dr. Kim Tripp, vice president for horticulture and living collections, said the prolonged warmth, coupled with a long drought, had left trees and other plants discombobulated and stressed. To survive the winter, Dr. Tripp said, plants have to go through a long process of shutting down: annuals die, perennials kill off their tops, deciduous plants shed their leaves, evergreens pump antifreeze into their needles.''It's still October for the plants,'' she said. If it suddenly goes from October to January, water could freeze in the plants' cells and burst them. If the freeze hits anything that has actually flowered, it will not develop buds for next spring, she said. Several years of these conditions could take a toll on trees, too. Mature canopy could be lost because such stress leaves trees more vulnerable to disease and insects.''You fight off a cold better when you are healthy and vigorous,'' Dr. Tripp said. ''When you are stressed your metabolism is slower and healing is slower.''The OutlookEven if this past fall's warm  weather was only a blip in the global thermostat, most scientists are beginning to believe that human alteration of the atmosphere is at least partly responsible for a warming trend that has been going on for decades.''I think it's increasingly clear that humans are influencing the climate,'' said Dr. Peter H. Gleick, director of the Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment and Security in Oakland, Calif.  ''I think the debate over whether the climate is going to change is over, and now the debate is what will the impacts be, how bad will they be and what should we do about it.''Dr. Edward S. Sarachik, a professor of atmospheric sciences at the University of Washington in Seattle, said it was especially significant that 2001 had proved so warm. Usually, the conditions in a single year are discounted by climate scientists because weather conditions vary naturally over short time spans, pushed this way or that by unpredictable shifts in sea temperatures and wind patterns. But in 2001 there was no such push -- in particular, no sign of El Nio, the ocean condition in which unusually warm waters spread across the Pacific. El Nio has exerted a powerful influence in many other recent unusually warm years, including 1998, the warmest year on record. But this year, the Pacific has just emerged from the opposite, cooler condition, La Nia. A milder climate has short-term and long-term consequences for everything from water supplies to beaches. Higher temperatures, for example, mean reduced snow melt from the Sierras, on which California's reservoirs depend.''As the earth is warming, less of our precipitation will be snow and more will fall as rain, and that has a whole series of problems for us,'' Dr. Gleick said. ''It means we're going to get more runoff in the winters when we're most worried about floods. And at the other end it means our spring and our summer runoff is going to be reduced -- and that's when we need it most.''In Alaska -- and much of Siberia -- the annual mean temperature has risen 3 to 5 degrees over the last 30 years, said Prof. Gunter Weller, director of the Cooperative Institute for Arctic Research at the University of Alaska at Fairbanks.''There's no doubt over all that the Arctic has warmed pretty substantially, and that it's causing serious problems,'' Professor Weller said. Among the effects are increased coastal erosion from melting glaciers, which have raised the sea level in the region, and thawing in the permafrost that has wreaked havoc with roads and could eventually damage structures like the 800-mile-long trans-Alaska pipeline. Elsewhere, continued warming could produce rising sea levels and more frequent and more severe storms. Seas will rise with temperatures because water expands as it warms, and because melting terrestrial ice will send water flowing into oceans. Hurricanes draw their energy from the heat in ocean waters, so warming could make them more frequent and more powerful. The consequences would be most serious for the East and Gulf Coasts, which are lined with low-lying barrier islands. A rise of one to three feet in the sea level, which many scientists predict by the end of this century, could send sea water 100 feet or more inland on these stretches of coast, in communities where the federal government is spending tens of millions of dollars a year to pump sand onto shrinking beaches. The new evidence of human-caused warming comes as the Bush administration is turning its attention back to climate change, which it had approached with skepticism and a determination to choose no remedies that might hinder the use of coal, oil and other fossil fuels. Most notably, last March Mr. Bush rejected the Kyoto Protocol, the first international agreement that would require industrialized countries to cut emissions of greenhouse gases or face penalties. The last details were approved by almost every other major country at a meeting in November, although the treaty still awaits ratification. In the next month or two, the Commerce Department, answering a request by Mr. Bush last summer, is planning to issue a new research plan aimed at improving United States climate monitoring and modeling efforts. Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, is one of many from both parties in Congress seeking significant new efforts, especially climate research.''I have asked that consideration be given in the coming budget to increase activities,'' Mr. Stevens said, ''to zero in on places where they know they can get some firm data and get some firm predictions.''Others in Congress are proposing bills to limit releases of carbon dioxide from power plants, but Mr. Bush rejected such a move last spring. While officials debate how to deal with the phenomenon, temperatures continue to climb. Along with whatever warming might be happening because of human activities, federal scientists say, the Pacific is emerging from its most recent cool spell and the warm waters of another El Nio are getting ready to spread. Science  Correction:  January 1, 2002, Tuesday  A picture caption on Dec. 23 with a front-page article about the unusually warm fall weather misspelled the name of a ski resort in Warren, Vt., and omitted the date of the photograph. The resort is Sugarbush, not Sugarbrush. The picture was made on Dec. 4, when slopes were barren and lifts empty. By the time of publication, about 20 inches of snow had fallen, allowing skiing to begin. Correction: January 1, 2002, TuesdayA picture caption on Dec. 23 with a front-page article about the unusually warm fall weather misspelled the name of a ski resort in Warren, Vt., and omitted the date of the photograph. The resort is Sugarbush, not Sugarbrush. The picture was made on Dec. 4, when slopes were barren and lifts empty. By the time of publication, about 20 inches of snow had fallen, allowing skiing to begin.<br>

George W. Bush was a man with a serious environmental problem throughout his campaign for the presidency. And shortly after he took office, environmental groups successfully managed to cast him as ''pro arsenic,'' for his administration's attempts to change water safety standards. Then came Sept. 11, after which the biggest environmental groups fell silent, fearful that attacking the president would make them appear unpatriotic. In response, the administration pressed ahead as quietly as possible -- largely through the regulatory process -- to allow road-building in national forests, reverse the phase-out of snowmobiles in national parks, make it easier for mining companies to dig for gold, copper and zinc on public lands, relax energy-efficiency standards for air conditioners, bar the reintroduction of grizzly bears in the Northwest and make it easier for developers to eliminate wetlands. Most recently, the administration approved the largest timber salvage operation in the nation's history in the Bitterroot National Forest, openly skirting the public appeals process, a move that has been halted by the courts. The administration also pushed for drilling for oil in a wildlife refuge in Alaska as an attempt to bolster national security. And the fog of war has obscured, too, the administration's policy on global warming. Last summer, after President Bush rejected the international Kyoto treaty on global warming, he pledged to start research programs to study climate shifts and find new technologies to cut emissions without harming the economy. But government scientists say that administration officials are now telling agencies not to expect additional money to pay for new efforts. Many of these actions would have received front-page coverage as part of the evolving ''pro-business'' tilt of the Bush White House. KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

It was late on a Saturday, just days after the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, when President Bush was ready to sign an order freezing the assets in the United States of suspected Islamic terrorist groups, the first showy financial strike against Al Qaeda. The order was to be announced, or so the plan went, the following Monday by Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill. But the president suddenly had another idea.''I am about to sign this order,'' an aide recalled Mr. Bush saying. ''Why am I not announcing it?''The staff scrambled, and by Monday morning it was the president, not Mr. O'Neill, who made the announcement, reinforcing the message that Mr. Bush would direct the war against terrorism on many fronts. Nearly a year after taking office, Mr. Bush has seized the catastrophe of Sept. 11 to project himself as the commander in chief at the center of the crisis and to reach for new powers. His most assertive action was a November order establishing military tribunals for accused terrorists, but Mr. Bush has also moved to keep presidential papers secret and permitted sweeping government efforts to investigate anyone suspected of terrorism. To help in those investigations, he expanded government wiretapping and allowed the monitoring of communications between some people in federal custody and their lawyers. And yet Mr. Bush returns to Washington next week facing a variety of challenges. In foreign policy, he is trying to avert a war between India and Pakistan, and monitoring the financial collapse of Argentina, which an administration official acknowledged today had not been a sufficient focus of the White House after Sept. 11. Domestically, Mr. Bush says he will try to revive an economic stimulus package that failed in a bitter round of partisan Washington combat at the end of December. He also faces Democrats increasingly willing to challenge his policies, even while avoiding taking on a president with high approval ratings. Mr. Bush did win big legislative victories on a $1.3 trillion tax cut and an education bill, but the White House is not expecting as easy a ride in 2002.''He's got more problems with the Congress than with the public,'' said John Morton Blum, the Yale historian who taught Mr. Bush 20th-century American politics in college. The result is that Mr. Bush is likely to spend a considerable portion of his political capital if he hopes to revive the agenda he laid out so forcefully a year ago.''I think the lesson he learned from his father's presidency is that if you have capital you must use it wisely -- but use it,'' said Dan Bartlett, the White House communications director. And he has shown that he is willing to use it to accomplish goals that go far beyond prosecuting the war. With only cursory consultation of Congress, he announced the American withdrawal from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, with surprisingly little backlash from Russia or the allies. Similarly, Mr. Bush threatened a veto if Congress spent more than he wanted on domestic security. Congress protested, then acquiesced. Some historians say Mr. Bush seems captivated by Theodore Roosevelt, who grabbed more power for his office than any other president since Abraham Lincoln. The week before his inauguration, Mr. Bush kept a book of Roosevelt speeches on the coffee table in his living room at the Texas ranch, where he was preparing his inaugural address. On Friday at his ranch, Mr. Bush said he had just finished reading ''Theodore Rex,'' the second volume of Edmund Morris's biography of Roosevelt, this one focusing on the White House.''I see in Bush's performance to date the very large possibility that his model for the presidency is essentially that of Theodore Roosevelt,'' Mr. Blum said. So far, he added, ''I think he has claimed powers, and tried to aggrandize the office.''But unlike Roosevelt, Mr. Blum argued, Mr. Bush ''doesn't exude power, at least not yet.''Other historians say Mr. Bush's presidency has expanded simply because of circumstance.''The story of Bush has been the aggregating of power over the last few months,'' said William E. Leuchtenburg, a historian at the University of North Carolina, ''but I doubt that it has an awful lot to do with Theodore Roosevelt.''In any war, there's going to be a very great accretion of power to the president,'' he said, adding, ''He has an area he can roam around in and be as big a president as he wants to be.''Such a turn of events once seemed improbable: Mr. Bush began in the cold rain of January with an uncertain mandate, lost Republican control of the Senate by the spring, then faced a disappearing surplus and a menacing recession by the end of the summer. With no notice to the allies, he declared that the Kyoto treaty on global warming was ''dead,'' adding to European fears about an isolated America determined to go it alone. Mr. Bush's staff worried that his presidency seemed small. But then came Sept. 11, when Mr. Bush's powers as commander in chief coincided with the desires of many of those swept back into office by his election. First among them was Vice President Dick Cheney, who said he believed that Bill Clinton had squandered the power and prestige of the presidency.''I think it starts with a strong cabinet,'' said Andrew H. Card Jr., Mr. Bush's chief of staff. ''Look at the people in the news since Sept. 11 -- Cheney, Rumsfeld and Powell. They are strong leaders. But they also brought a great appreciation of the power of the presidency to their offices.''Mr. Card added that when the attacks occurred, ''the president knew he had to be commander in chief in the broadest sense of the word -- commander of the military, but also of the firefighters and the police and the mail carriers.''At home, Mr. Bush used his powers through much of the fall to bend Congress to his will. In November, when he was under severe pressure, even from Republicans, to increase spending for domestic security, he resisted. On Nov. 6, he summoned a delegation from Capitol Hill and bluntly announced that he would veto  legislation that went beyond the $40 billion he had already agreed to for this fiscal year for countering terrorism and rebuilding New York. Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin and the ranking minority member on the Appropriations Committee, had expected a negotiating session rather than an ultimatum. He was furious.''I said,'' Mr. Obey recalled, '' 'You can say anything you want, this is your house, Mr. President. But I've been coming down here for 30 years, and this is the first time that a president has told me his mind is closed before the subject is even opened.' '' Mr. Bush was unmoved. ''Thank you very much,'' he told the delegation, several people present said. ''I've got another meeting.''An administration official said Mr. Bush had not meant to be rude, just uncompromising. ''It was also a test of who was going to be paramount, the legislature or the executive, when it came to spending,'' the official said. As commander in chief, Mr. Bush made it clear from the first days of the war that he alone would make major strategic decisions. On the first weekend of bombing, he silenced a debate among his advisers about whether to broaden the war on terrorism's goals to include toppling Saddam Hussein of Iraq, saying that decision would come only after Al Qaeda was routed. And while European leaders have argued it would be a mistake to expand the war to Iraq, Mr. Bush had made it clear that he alone would make that call. Critics say Mr. Bush is showing his true stripes as a unilateralist who is interested in alliances only when they do not get in his way. Mr. Bush's closest advisers disagree.''George Shultz had this idea that you 'garden,' which means you have to constantly tend to your alliances,'' said Mr. Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice. She added that while ''the president is very much of that school, that never meant, from his point of view, that you simply go along to get along,'' citing his decisions on the Kyoto agreement and the A.B.M. treaty.''You have to stand for something,'' she added. ''You have to have a sense of what American interests are.'' Often that fits into a broader alliance, she said, and ''the war on terrorism is a great example of this.''That is also a telling example of the Bush style. In the first days after the attacks, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney decided that all the major strategic decisions about the war would be made in Washington. They built a coalition in the loosest sense -- with the exception of Britain, all the members were nonvoting partners.''No one wanted to re-create the worst moments of the gulf war, when the allies and the Arab states argued about what to do next, and how,'' one aide said. As he tried to create workable alliances abroad, Mr. Bush found he also had to repair relations among agencies of the executive branch.  Aides said Mr. Bush was stunned to discover after Sept. 11 how little the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. communicated. He set a new course, aides say, and now insists that Director Robert S. Mueller III of the F.B.I., sit in on the daily C.I.A. briefing in the Oval Office. The director of central intelligence, George J. Tenet, then remains for the F.B.I. briefing.''It's not unusual for the president to say at the end, to the two directors, 'Now I want you two to go off and work on this specific problem,' '' Mr. Card said. ''And the message travels down pretty fast.''A NATION CHALLENGED: DEALING WITH THE CRISIS

All hail to President Bush for how he has conducted the war against Osama bin Laden. Mr. Bush has emerged a far better commander in chief than anyone predicted. In the war on terrorism he has shown steely resolve, imagination, leadership and creativity. Thank you, Mr. Bush. And now, I wish Al Gore were president. Why? Quite simply because instead of showing resolve, imagination, leadership and creativity on the domestic front, Mr. Bush has done just the opposite. He has tried to use the tremendous upsurge in patriotism, bipartisanship and volunteerism triggered by the tragedy of Sept. 11 to drive a narrow, right-wing agenda from Sept. 10 into a Sept. 12 world. It's wrong. It won't work. It sells the country short and it will ultimately sell the Bush presidency short. I have no problem with nation-building in Afghanistan, but what I'm really interested in is nation-building in America -- using the power of Sept. 11 to make our country stronger, safer and a better global citizen in the world of Sept. 12, beginning with how we use energy. But so far, all that's happening is that we've made the world safer for Saudi Arabia and OPEC to raise oil prices again. In case you missed it, last Friday the Saudi-led cartel cut production by 6.5 percent to boost oil prices, while the world is struggling to get out of a recession induced in part by the terrorism of Osama bin Laden and 15 Saudi hijackers. Frankly, the thought that U.S. taxpayers, who have had to bail out the airline industry (which was devastated by Sept. 11 and by higher gas prices) and to finance the $1 billion-a-month war against bin Laden, will now have to pay more for oil because the Middle East regimes we're protecting want to hike the price, is an outrage. You'd think maybe the king of Saudi Arabia would say: ''America, we're as upset as you that Osama bin Laden and 15 Saudi youth were involved in the terrible attack on your shores. So we want to help America -- the engine of the global economy -- recover, as well as the developing world. As such, we're going to keep oil prices extremely low for the next six months, then we'll slowly lift them back to the $24-$28 range. It will cost us, but that's our tax cut for the world.''Is that too much to ask? Well, it seems so -- which leads me back to President Bush. The most obvious bold national project that Mr. Bush could launch now -- his version of the race to the moon -- would be a program for energy independence, based on developing renewable resources, domestic production and energy efficiency. Not only would every school kid in America be excited by such a project, but it also would be Mr. Bush's equivalent of Richard Nixon going to China -- the Texas oilman weaning America off of its dependence on Middle East oil. That would be a political coup!It would also be Mr. Bush's best response to foreigners who are enraged by America's refusal to join the Kyoto treaty to stop global warming. Mr. Bush could say that by weaning America away from oil gluttony he would be doing more for the environment than Kyoto ever would, which would greatly improve America's standing as a global good citizen. There are lots of ways Mr. Bush could go. ''Today one out of every seven barrels of oil produced in the world is consumed on American highways,'' says the respected oil consultant Philip Verleger. ''We could cut that by a third in five years if Washington were to offer tax incentives for manufacturers to produce more efficient vehicles and for consumers to buy them. Such tax cuts could be paid for with a higher gas tax, gradually phased in. Then we could replace all those American flag bumper stickers with ones that read: 'I cut my oil use by a third, how about you?' ''I don't want to be dependent on Mideast oil anymore. Countries in that region haven't had a good century in 700 years -- and they're not going to soon. Oil is their curse, as well as ours. It's corrupted their rulers, enabled them to keep their women backward and out of the work force, and prevented them from developing innovative economies that make things instead of just take things from the ground. They have a lot of homework to do before they will be stable allies. We will all benefit if they succeed, but for now we have to look after ourselves. So, Mr. Bush, ''Let's roll.'' Ultimately, presidential greatness is measured by what you do at home. If this war on terrorism ends with nation-building only in Afghanistan and not in America, it will be no victory at all. Maureen Dowd is on vacation.

1. IN WHICH GEORGE TRIES TO BUILD A FENCEThis is a story about global warming and a scientist named George Divoky, who studies a colony of Arctic seabirds on a remote barrier island off the northern coast of Alaska. I mention all this at the start because a reader might like to come to the point, and what could be more urgent than the very health and durability of this planet we call Earth? However, before George can pursue his inquiry into worldwide climate change; before he can puzzle out the connections between a bunch of penguinesque birds on a flat, snow-covered, icebound island and the escalating threat of droughts, floods and rising global temperatures, he must first mount a defense -- his only defense in this frozen, godforsaken place -- against the possibility of being consumed, down to the last toenail, by a polar bear while he sleeps. He must first build a fence. Cooper Island, June 4, 2 o'clock in the morning. The sky is a cold slab of gray, the air temperature hovers in the upper 20's and the wind -- always the wind -- howls across hundreds of miles of sea ice with such unremitting force that George has disappeared beneath a hat, two hoods and a thick fleece face mask covering all but his bespectacled eyes. Standing near the three small dome tents that make up his field camp on Cooper, George raises a pair of binoculars and begins to scan for bears. Past the island's north beach, a wind-scarred plain of sea ice stretches uninterrupted to the pole. To the south, the nearest tree stands 200 miles away on the far side of the Brooks Range. Here, some 330 miles north of the Arctic Circle, with the sun making a constant parabolic journey around the sky, George surveys a view that replicates in all directions: the snow-covered island merges with the sea ice at its shores, the dazzling sheets of sea ice stretch to meet a pale gray dome of sky. Surrounded by a vast, undulating whiteness, he appears to be standing in the middle of the Arctic Ocean. He appears to be standing on the tops of cirrus clouds.''So, . . . '' he says, and the rest of his words are carried off by the wind.''What?''''I said, so maybe we should put up the polar-bear fence before we get too fatigued!''Heading fast toward fatigue, I tell him that's a fine idea indeed, and exactly how many polar bears does he figure might be out there on the ice? George, who spends each summer on Cooper Island, is cheerfully indifferent to its dangers and discomforts and reassuring to those who aren't. Discussing a recent incident in which some Inupiat Eskimos had to shoot a bear that wandered into their nearby whaling camp, I consider it bad news -- there are bears in the vicinity! -- while George thinks of it as good: yes, but now there's one less bear. Still scanning the faint horizon line, George insists there's nothing to get worked up about. For the most part, bears stay several miles offshore, where they can gorge on ringed and bearded seals. If a bear were to come to this island, he points out, its massive 800-pound frame would stand out against the sky like an approaching blimp. Even if a bear were to wander into camp, he goes on, we are sufficiently armed with a shotgun, cans of compressed pepper spray (mace) and a flarelike device known as a screamer-banger. Nonetheless, George confirms that at least one big bear shows up on Cooper each summer, usually to scavenge the beach for dead, washed-up seals; and furthermore, that an encounter can be so unpleasant that you do have to figure the odds a little differently. ''I was out here once and injured the tendon in my knee,'' he says. ''I couldn't walk, I couldn't stay warm. I kept thinking, If it's true predators key in on the weak and the infirm. . . . '' He shrugs and gestures to the chilling evidence of predation right by our feet -- a caribou skull, several seal vertebrae, a scattering of gull's feathers and the sun-bleached skeleton of a clean-picked walrus. ''I guess it's safe to assume that most of our fellow Americans are south of us, sound asleep, a lot warmer than we are, and not preparing to put up a polar-bear fence.''Cooper is one of six barrier islands stretching off the coast of Point Barrow, Alaska, where the United States -- along with continental North America -- comes to a chilly, desolate end. Three miles tip to tip, the island is nothing more than a snow-covered strip of sand and gravel frozen into the Arctic pack ice, its only vertical relief an odd cityscape of rusted 55-gallon drums and destroyed ammunition boxes left here by the United States Navy sometime after the Korean War. In 1972, George came out to Cooper as a young ornithologist and discovered a rare colony of black guillemots -- pigeon-size, stiff-legged seabirds -- nesting in the abandoned drums and boxes. And for many years he pursued a rather esoteric study of them -- mate selection, age of first breeding, ''the kind of thing that's of interest to about 20 ornithologists,'' he says now. Then, almost by accident, he discovered that his birds were picking up on another kind of frequency, and that if he watched and listened with great care, they could tell him about something no less consequential than the climatic fate of the earth. In coming to the Alaskan Arctic year after year, George is following the logic of many other scientists -- that to understand Earth's mysterious and changing climate, you should go directly to its extremes. In the last two decades, scores of researchers have come to the nearby town of Barrow, hoping to learn why the Arctic is warming so significantly and how the changing polar climate may affect the planet as a whole -- if the Arctic sea ice were to one day disappear, it would cause drastic changes in the climate of the Northern Hemisphere. But while many scientists gather their data from remote sensing devices -- satellites, buoys, robotic airplanes -- or come to this frozen, inhospitable region on brief, well-equipped trips before returning to the comforts of the ''Lower Forty-Eight,'' George spends three months of each year sleeping in a small yellow dome tent, warming himself over a two-burner propane stove and crawling around on his hands and knees, up to his binoculars in guillemot scat. Thousands of miles away from the debates on greenhouse-gas emissions, relatively unknown even within the scientific community, George, now 55, has come out to Cooper Island every year for more than 25 years, often with no financial or institutional support. It is not too much to say that he has staked his entire adult life on this barren gravel bar and its avian inhabitants. And now, as he continues to scan the island with his binoculars under bright, 2 a. m. skies, it is not too much to say that his life is staked on whether he can successfully erect that polar-bear fence. The fence became an essential part of George's repertory for survival after he awoke in his tent one night to the crunch, crunch, crunch of approaching footsteps. When he crawled out to investigate, however, he thought he must have been dreaming: he was alone on the island. The next morning, the 16-inch tracks in the snow told him otherwise. If it's possible to see your life flash before your eyes in retrospect, that's what happened to George: a big female bear and her cub had walked within 20 yards. While the cub stayed put, the mother came up to the doorway of his tent, evidently sniffing George's placid, sleeping head before he woke, unzipped his sleeping bag and inadvertently scared both bears away.''All right, let's see what we've got here,'' George says, shaking the many parts of the fence out of its canvas bag onto the snow. George's fence is made up of 30 three-foot-high garden stakes that he and I, fueled by the adrenaline of our recent arrival, now try to place in a circle around our tents. Each stake has a small pulley, through which we thread a fine piece of cord. The cord makes a perimeter around the tents and meets up at the home stake, which is connected to a spring-loaded mousetrap, an eight-volt battery and a car alarm with a large plastic horn. The fence operates on the principle that a bear wandering into camp will push the cord, the cord will trigger the mousetrap, and the closing of the mousetrap will complete an electrical circuit that turns on the alarm, thereby waking George and me to the dangers at hand. That, at any rate, is the principle. For more than an hour, we struggle to drive the garden stakes firmly into the snow, and each time we test the fence by pushing at the cord, a stake pulls loose and the cord slackens, preventing the triggering of the mousetrap. Then, when George turns his attention to the car-alarm horn, a sharp crack echoes in the air, followed by the gentle sound of his voice: ''Uh-oh. I think I broke it.''Although George has spent more summers on Cooper Island than he often cares to count, he seems, upon first meeting, an unlikely candidate for the solitary hardships of fieldwork in the high Arctic. Handsome, boyish, with disheveled hair and a face deeply creased by abundant laughter in subfreezing temperatures, George lives nine months of the year in Seattle, and there is about him the unmistakable air of the overcaffeinated urban neurotic. He wakes up talking and, rushing to get the words out, keeps up a rapid, digressive chatter -- about George Bush and the Kyoto Protocols, the challenges of romantic commitment and the latest from Philip Roth -- almost until the moment, 18 hours later, that he falls directly asleep. It seems a waste of his conversational gifts for him to be on Cooper Island alone. It's also somewhat alarming. When I first met George in Barrow last February, I watched in wonder at his interactions with the mechanical world -- forgetting to keep his car engine running when the outside temperature dropped to 30 below; or, when he parked and did remember to plug his engine block into an electric heater, forgetting to unplug before driving off -- snap!But for almost three decades, he has hurled himself to the very ends of the earth and met its risks and challenges with tireless enthusiasm. When his new stove broke on the first day of one field season, he kept a series of bonfires going all summer; when he ran out of freshwater, he placed tin cups around his tent to catch the rain; when his radio broke, he tried calling for help with an old signal mirror from World War II. (He also tried spelling HELP on the beach with large pieces of driftwood, but came up one log short, inadvertently announcing to the skies a pressing need for KELP.)Now, holding the two halves of the car alarm in his hands, he shrugs and says, ''To be honest, the fence doesn't keep bears out; it just lets you know that one is about to eat you. Really, it's just a placebo.'' He looks around at our camp -- one tent for cooking and two for sleeping that we've pitched far enough apart for privacy while also keeping, in George's words, ''within screaming distance.'' For our campsite, he chose what seemed the safest, most sheltered location near the island's south shore -- out of harm's way, and back from the thick, upended slabs of sea ice that have rammed up against the island to the north. But as far as I can see, we are nothing if not in harm's way: like a Bedouin camp in the desert, our three yellow tents are the only signs of life in this white-on-white landscape -- the only signs of food, come to think of it, to an animal so wily that it stalks prey by sliding on its belly behind a moving block of ice and is said to raise its white paw to cover its black nose for camouflage in the snow. ''Any bear that shows up on this island is probably very hungry or very deranged,'' George says fatalistically, ''and there's not much you can do to keep Charles Manson out of the suburbs.''II: IN WHICH GEORGE RIDES ON BOATS, PLANES AND SNOWMOBILESIf this story is, truly, about a flock of seabirds in the midst of worldwide climate change, then a reader may be moved to ask: Where are the birds? What's with all the snow and ice? And why does George seem less concerned about the tangible threat of polar bears today than he does with a few intangible degrees of global warming tomorrow? To begin to answer those questions, it may help to review the scientific argument about human-driven climate change: that our endless consumption of fossil fuels is pumping vast amounts of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere, causing global temperatures to rise. It may also help to brush up on some geography regarding the very top of the world. Whether the glaciers of Greenland will continue to melt and the southern oceans rise up to flood Bangladesh, whether Cape Cod will erode to a sand spit and the American prairie dry out like the Mojave, whether thunderstorms will one day reach Antarctica and sparrows the North Pole -- whether all the disasters predicted by climatologists and their computer models eventually come to pass, one piece of the puzzle is already in place: the earth's climate will change first -- and change most substantially -- in the Arctic, that enigmatic expanse of snow and ice, of ancient peoples and unspeakably hostile temperatures that spans the top of the world. Despite its crucial role in managing the earth's climate, however, scientists know surprisingly little about the Arctic compared with the world's other oceans. Covered by ice, nearly impassable by ship, the Arctic is still earth's least-explored frontier. On a planet that has been thoroughly mapped, ship captains in the Arctic still make up their charts as they go along; two years ago, a Navy submarine carrying a crew of scientists passed over a drowned, mile-high mountain no one knew was there. Now that Russian science has gone bankrupt, Canadian research is suffering extreme budget cuts and most U.S. money for polar research gets funneled to the McMurdo research station in Antarctica, some of the best work to fill in the blank spots of the Arctic is being done by a small but hardy group of scientists associated with the Barrow Arctic Science Consortium, which uses this thriving, mostly Inupiat whaling community as its base. Like most bush communities in northern Alaska, Barrow is accessible only by air, and on June 1, George and I met up in the Fairbanks airport for the 90-minute flight. We had clear skies as we left the wooded foothills around Fairbanks and climbed steadily toward the Brooks Range. Watching the last of the boreal forest finger its way into protected valleys, we flew over the snow-and-glacier country of the Brooks -- ridge after ridge of granite peaks and frozen valleys so remote that they still exist largely without name. Cresting the mountains and passing the imaginary Arctic Circle, we saw the peaks turn to foothills, the foothills level off to the North Slope's frozen coastal plain. In north-central Alaska, the coastal plain stretches for more than 150 miles, and our plane followed the course of wild, braided rivers over a snow-covered, wind-swept landscape desolate as the moon. On this day, the Arctic pack ice was still jammed up against shore, and from the plane it was impossible to tell exactly where land ended and sea began. But eventually a hodgepodge of dusty streets and low-slung buildings came into view, and we touched down in Barrow, perhaps the only town in the United States that would be lost in a sea of whiteness on the 1st of June. Cooper Island is just 25 miles beyond Barrow, with the ice of the Arctic Ocean against its north shore and the ice of Elson Lagoon to the south, but the fact that those 25 miles include -- at various times throughout the summer -- solid ice, junked-up ice, choppy 33-degree water, driving snow, sleet, dense fog and 40-mile-an-hour gusts makes travel to and from the island about as predictable as the behavior of Cooper's occasional bears. To start his field season, George usually snowmobiles to Cooper over the frozen lagoon, as we planned to do two days after our arrival in Barrow. By mid-June, however, the lagoon ice starts to break up and Cooper begins to resemble an island with water lapping at its shores. For the remainder of the summer George is dependent on some kind of air transport for travel and resupply. The phrase ''air transport,'' with its connotations of scheduled departures and uniformed pilots, is misleading. George has built what he proudly refers to as a landing strip on Cooper, intended for small propeller planes equipped with tundra tires. In point of fact, it's a clearing in the gravel with two automobile tires to indicate the start and two crossed, wooden boards marking the end. And unless the plane is a ''tail dragger,'' the soft gravel will make it land nose first into the ground. ''Every time I walk back to camp, I drag my boots over my landing strip,'' George says. ''Do that for 20 years, and you have a nice place to land a plane.''The first time George flew by small plane to Alaska, in 1972, he was traveling with three other biologists; within four years all had died in separate plane accidents. Of the 25 bush pilots who have flown him to and from Cooper over the years, five are no longer alive. Nonetheless, George remains sanguine about the perils of flying, often with some odd pilots at the controls. He has flown with the foolish (a pilot who took off with a chipped propeller after trying to fix it with a nail file), and he has flown with the idiotic (a pilot who refused to turn back when propane started leaking into the cabin). And once he planned to fly back to Barrow with a pilot who couldn't find the island beneath a 50-foot cloud bank and zoomed back and forth while George, on the ground, used his radio to guide him. (''You're to the north. . . . Now you're too far south. . . . O.K., now you're right above me!'') The only way George refuses to travel is by boat, ever since he was coming back from Cooper on a windy day and his 12-foot Boston whaler took in volumes of spray over the bow. While George bailed furiously, he and the captain watched the outboard motor slip right off the stern and sink to the bottom of the lagoon. Eventually they were towed to shore by Barrow Search and Rescue. ''I'm ready to have X number of minutes of terror if a plane goes down,'' George says, ''but just the thought of going in that water -- it's 33 degrees. It's a toxic substance. It might as well be an acid bath.''My appreciation for George's fortitude only grew as I tried, while still in Barrow, to arrange a return flight from Cooper in two weeks' time. I called the local air-charter service that used to perform beach landings with a Cessna 185, but a pilot there told me they had suspended off-runway landings ''after we rolled that plane up into an itty-bitty ball.'' When I reached another pilot with his own light, fixed-wing aircraft, he asked in a challenging tone where on the island I expected him to land. I explained about the landing strip, the tires, the X marking the spot. ''Sure, sure,'' he replied and turned down the job as well. With so many recent small-plane crashes on the North Slope keeping pilots quivering on the ground, I eventually found myself with one last option: a search-and-rescue pilot named Gary Quarles, who owned a small vintage helicopter with a rebuilt engine, though he seemed as reluctant as all the rest to take on the potential complications of the job. At this point, George stepped in on my behalf, and I saw for myself how he has managed to conduct a 27-year, poorly financed study in remote Alaska largely by sheer force of personality alone. Quarles has the pilot's requisite drop-dead sobriety, but George invited him over for coffee and a chat. He told Quarles about his birds. (''They're sort of like pigeons, but their black feathers have a subtle green iridescence -- it's very impressive.'') And he described all the methods he has devised over the years to survive on Cooper. (''It's like we're inventing a whole new culture out there.'') And with a nifty bit of anthropomorphism, he explained what brings the birds back to Cooper Island each year. (''Frankly, I know what they're going through. I once drove from East Lansing, Mich., to Sunapee, N. H., to visit my girlfriend, and I actually blew out the engine of my car thinking, I've got to get there! I've got to get there!'') By the time Quarles reached the bottom of his coffee cup, he was laughing and on board, promising not only to pick me up, but also to run resupply for George throughout the summer.''Well, I guess it's optimistic to think Gary will actually come through for us,'' George said after Quarles left. ''But then evolution selected humans for optimism, didn't it? If Gary can't do the job,'' he went on, ''I bet the folks at Search and Rescue will come get you. To be honest, this is how it always goes. Every year I fly to Barrow never knowing how I'm going to get out to the island and back. But I've learned it's just a matter of putting yourself in the next situation, putting yourself in a position where a favorable outcome is not only likely, but absolutely necessary.'' He stopped and smiled. ''See, unless you're stuck out on Cooper on June 15, no one's going to think of coming out to rescue you on the 15th.''On the morning of our departure, after a fitful night of sleep, I met up with George at the Barrow Arctic Science Consortium for a final check of equipment, then to load three long wooden sleds with our gear: food, tents, stoves, pots, pans, water jugs, shotgun, radio, Global Positioning System, sleeping bags and mounds of fleece and down. Dave Ramey, who runs operations for BASC and moonlights as George's Jewish mother, alternately worried and scolded him for leaving everything to the last minute, for not upgrading his field camp after all these years. ''Really, George, why don't you just build a cabin out there?'' he said. ''It's crazy to be crawling in and out of tents all the time. And you really ought to use an Arctic oven -- that would warm you right up.''Ramey and two of his colleagues had agreed to take us out, so we hitched the three loaded sleds to the backs of three snowmobiles and, after pushing hard from behind, ran and jumped on back. Within minutes of leaving Barrow, we hit thick fog and white-out conditions, and as we plowed across the ice-covered lagoon, we often lost sight of each other, hearing only the drone of engines in the mist before a wraithlike, hooded figure and a headlamp came back into view, as if through a desert sandstorm. For the next hour and a half, we roared across the smooth lagoon ice, tunneling through dense sheets of fog, and riding shotgun on the back of a sled, gazing out upon the absolute, featureless whiteness, I was hard pressed to say whether we were moving at 5 or 50 miles an hour; or whether the black, elongated bodies of ringed seals resting by their breathing holes were a stone's throw or a full mile away; or whether we weren't, after all, floating through a cloud bank at 30,000 feet. One summer, George came out to Cooper Island and, lacking landmarks of any kind, mistakenly set up his camp on the snow-covered lagoon -- and spent five days waiting for land to appear beneath him before he realized his terra was no more firma than a slowly melting sheet of ice. He beat a quick path to shore. On this day we had Dave Ramey and a G.P.S. to guide us, and after crossing 25 miles of lagoon ice, we reached a slight rise in elevation, no higher than the back of a breaching whale, and some bare strips of gravel, which confirmed we had reached the shores of Cooper Island. After helping to unload the sleds, Ramey and his colleagues started up their snowmobiles for the return trip to Barrow. And after waving them goodbye, George and I watched the red taillights disappear into the white fog, then stood and listened to the whine of engines diminish, then die completely in the wind. Alone with George, I looked around at the snow-covered island with its scattering of bones and feathers, the fog hemming in our sightlines to within 100 feet. Unable to tell where land ended and sea began, peering through the mist for bears and up at the sky for birds, I groped for the comforts of the familiar, or at least the analogous. Go to the Alps and you'll recognize the Himalayas. Spend time in Malibu and you'll know what's up on Montauk. But this bleak, bewildering place, in which wind rippling a pool of melt water shows up as a sign of life -- what did Cooper Island echo if you'd not yet been to Mars? George saw me shivering and said, ''Eat and drink everything in sight, and you'll start to thermo-regulate.'' So I cinched my hood a little tighter, adjusted my face mask and, beginning to comprehend what it meant to be a creature of Earth's temperate zones, shoveled trail mix into my mouth. But in truth I'd had the shivers ever since Barrow, when Dave Ramey took me aside to deliver some forceful words. ''We'll get you out to Cooper Island today,'' he said. ''But the rest is up to you. I don't know what George may have promised you,'' he went on, his tone suggesting a dozen messy situations George had dragged him into. ''But unless you've got reliable air transport lined up, you should expect to be out there till the ice melts out. I'm serious. Don't expect Search and Rescue, or me, or anyone else to come get you.'' He looked at me hard. ''If you go out to Cooper Island today, you're on your own.''III: IN WHICH GEORGE FIRST ENCOUNTERS THE MYSTERY OF THE LITTLE BLACK BIRDCooper Island, June 6, 12:30 in the morning. The sky is full of slanting rain and freezing fog, the air temperature can't seem to reach 30 and the wind continues to blow out of the northeast with such numbing regularity that we've begun using it for support; if it stopped in an instant, we'd both pitch face-forward into the snow. Standing at the edge of the frozen Arctic Ocean, George lifts a high-powered telephoto scope up to his right eye and begins to scan the skies, wondering when his birds will leave their winter habitat on the sea ice and make their annual trip to Cooper Island to breed. George's scope is black and cylindrical and strapped with silver duct tape to the butt of an old wooden rifle. To brace the rifle stock against his shoulder and peer through the chunky, mortarlike scope, he must squint and lean back, bending slightly at the knees. Beneath his hat, his hoods and his thick fleece face mask, he looks like a nearsighted bugler, blowing reveille into a gale. With no sign of the birds just yet and weather conditions such as they are, we appear to have two choices: walk or freeze. We choose to walk, while George begins to tell the story of how a heap of Navy trash -- some of it stamped with the words please do not destroy, these boxes are reusable -- came to be used by several hundred black guillemots and one lone scientist whose narrow, ornithological study eventually led him onto the trail of worldwide climate change. Except for the fact that the dead walrus by our campsite had not yet decomposed, Cooper looked much the same when George first came upon it in the summer of 1972. Back then, five years after oil was discovered at Prudhoe Bay, environmentalists were on alert for the possibility of tanker spills, and George, 26 and already an ardent ornithologist, was hired by the Smithsonian Institution to go up and down the northern Alaskan coast to identify any vulnerable seabird habitats. Traveling the coastline on a Coast Guard icebreaker, he was dropped off one day on Cooper. Remarkably, the sun was out, catching the surface of all the Navy debris, and as he walked along, marveling at this strangely picturesque collection of scattered wood and rusted metal, two black guillemots, startled by the crunch of gravel, suddenly flew out from beneath an ammo box. Since guillemots don't normally breed in this part of the Arctic -- they are cavity nesters whose natural habitats, rocky cliffs and headlands, do not exist for more than 500 miles -- it was, in George's words, ''definitely a hit.'' He looked around and found eight more pairs breeding in the boxes, at which point, he says, ''I almost wet my pants.'' Before he left that day, he flipped over a piece of wood, creating a new nest site, and when he returned to Cooper three weeks later, he looked under the planks and found eggs. George couldn't get enough money to return to Cooper for three more years, but in 1975, when funds for another assessment project became available, he asked to be sent back. When he arrived, he found 18 pairs of guillemots breeding in the boxes, and hoping to grow the colony, George began creating -- and naming -- new nest sites in earnest: Freshman Housing, the Condos, Married Student Housing. . . . ''Not only were there these odd places,'' he says, ''but you could create odd places and have them breed there.'' To a degree that was unusual even in the field of ornithology, George became obsessed, and over the next 10 years, he came out to Cooper each summer -- creating nest sites, banding the birds and, because guillemots are a long-lived species displaying fidelity to both their mates and their nest sites, coming to know them as individuals. One bird, nicknamed WOGy because of its white-orange-gray leg band, has returned to her same nest site on Cooper for more than 20 years. ''It was like a suburban street in the 1950's,'' George says. ''I knew who lived in every house.'' By 1978, there were 70 guillemots on Cooper Island, and by 1981 the population was up to 220. By 1990, almost 600 birds were scrambling around the drums and ammo boxes, looking for places to breed. Back then, George was thinking no more about global warming than any well-informed person with an interest in the natural world. Sharing the island with the birds and the bears, he had other things on his mind, and if he did pause to consider the Arctic climate, he assumed that it was static. Because he always got out to Cooper after the snow had melted and the birds had already occupied their nest sites, he also assumed that his seabirds timed their arrival on Cooper Island to the summer solstice, their reproductive schedule cued by the lengthening days. In 1984, however, he happened to come out to Cooper earlier than usual, when the nest boxes were still covered by snow, and seeing that, he began to wonder if the birds' breeding habits were prompted not by the lengthening photo period, as he'd originally thought, but by access to their nest cavities -- like clockwork, the first egg in the colony always showed up exactly 14 days after the birds occupied their nests. Scientific paradigms don't shift overnight, however, and more than 10 years of grinding, repetitive fieldwork would pass before George came to understand exactly what that meant. In 1995, in response to Vice President Al Gore's task force on climate change, a call went out for data sets: did anyone have information that would shed light on regional climate change? George acquired National Weather Service data on when the snow melted at Barrow and plotted the dates on a graph. Then he looked at his own data on when the first egg showed up on Cooper Island and plotted those dates as well. The correlation leapt off the page: from 1975 to 1995, snow was melting in northern Alaska, on average, five days earlier each decade. Over those same 20 years, the date his guillemots laid their eggs was occurring, on average, five days earlier each decade. In fact, since guillemots require at least an 80-day snow-free summer in which to copulate, ovulate, hatch and fledge their chicks -- and there were rarely 80 snow-free days in northern Alaska until the 1960's -- they wouldn't even be this far north were it not for warmer temperatures. Expanding their range, playing with the edge of a changing climate, his guillemots, he realized, were tracking the region's snow melt on an annual basis. And an earlier date of snow melt was, in effect, an indication that the seasons were in flux; that in a mere 20 years, the brief Arctic summer was now arriving 10 days earlier; and perhaps most important, that climate change was having a biological effect, leaving a fingerprint on a species living in a seemingly remote, pristine environment thousands of miles away from the industrial hand of man. And over the past few years, George has come to believe that the warmer Arctic climate is changing not only his birds' breeding habits but also the species in a far more profound way. Traditionally, the birds come back to Cooper Island over three successive nights, trying to gauge the degree of snow melt from the air, and there are dangers at every turn. If George's birds arrive on the island when it is still covered by snow, they can't take refuge in their dark, protected nest cavities and, with black feathers set off against the white snow, they run a high risk of predation; one summer a snowy owl showed up during the birds' mass arrival and swiped a guillemot out of the flock, eating it offshore and nicely demonstrating why getting to the island too early poses such a danger. If, on the other hand, the guillemots arrive too late, they risk losing their longtime mates, which is what happened one summer when one of George's favorite birds, Black-White-Black, returned to Cooper two days late only to find its mate, White-Red-White, otherwise engaged. Major battles ensued as Black-White-Black tried to fight his way back into his longtime nest. ''It was something to watch,'' George recalls. ''There was blood on top of the nest site and guillemot footprints in the blood!'' Caught between the perils of early and late arrival, knowing that their survival and reproductive success depends on perfect timing, the guillemots of Cooper Island have had to develop a highly sophisticated method for gauging snow melt. Those that can do it have persisted; those that can't have not. In effect, the warming of the North American Arctic has already precipitated natural selection for birds that can assess climate change in a highly sensitive way. Just what a hormonally crazed, falcon-fearing guillemot actually looks like became visible to me on our very first night on the island, when George suddenly looked up at the sky at 2 a. m. and said with considerable excitement, ''I think I hear guillemots!'' I heard or saw not a thing. Again, George looked and listened: ''Yup, they're definitely up there somewhere.'' And a moment later, I had my first sighting: 12 black birds in a tight flock, flying skittishly over the island at 500 feet, their rapid wing beats making a faint, wobbly Doppler sound like the hum of a dozen tiny windmills. Keeping in tight, antipredator formation, determined not to descend into owl or falcon range, they swooped over the snow-covered island, assessing the degree of snow melt on their nest sites and, evidently displeased with what they saw, disappeared as quickly as they'd arrived, dispersing like dust motes into the flat gray sky. On the following night, with low fog engulfing the island, just one bird showed up, checked out the dismal conditions and flew back out to sea. But tonight, as we walk back to camp after touring the island in the steady rain, eight of them are back, flying lower and less nervously than they were two nights before. Directly above their nest sites, they set their wings and come dive-bombing toward the ground, but pull out of the dive at a hundred feet, caught between their hormonal urge to breed and their terror of landing so conspicuously on the white snow. Then, out of nowhere comes a second flock, merging with the first, flying with agitation, a few individual birds dropping from the flock with a stronger urge to land, but joining the safety of the group once again. Suddenly, their numbers have grown to 20, flying in tight concentric circles at 50 feet -- around and around, dipping, rising, surveying the ground still half-covered in snow. I take my eyes away to write some notes, and when I look up again there are 40, groups merging and breaking apart, darting like schools of minnows, keeling from black wing to white underwing, visible to invisible against the slate gray sky. For half an hour, we watch the complex choreography. And at 12:52 a. m., one bird breaks from the group and heads toward ground. ''This guy's going to land!'' George cries out. ''This guy's going to land!'' Feet splayed, wings pulled back, the first guillemot of the season arrives on Cooper with a great fluttering fanfare of wings. George looks through his scope and, recognizing the bird, lets out a hoot. ''That's a chick that fledged here -- a Cooper product, back in the 'hood!''After three nights alone on the island, George is delighted that his birds are back. But he's also mindful of the grim chronology: when he began his study almost 30 years ago, snow persisted on Cooper, preventing his birds from gaining access to their nests until the last week of June. Over those same 30 years, despite natural year-to-year variability, the birds have arrived, on average, five days earlier each decade. ''The great thing about guillemots is that they're birds, they're nonpolitical, they have no choice but to react,'' he says. ''Every weather station in the Arctic should have a bunch of guillemots nearby so that if skeptics doubt the weather data, you can point to the date the first egg gets laid in the colony.'' Tonight, it is June 6. The birds are back three days earlier than they were the year before. IV: IN WHICH GEORGE IMPERSONATES A GUILLEMOTUnlike Antarctica, a continent surrounded by ocean, the Arctic is mostly ocean ringed by land -- the frozen, inhospitable fringes of Alaska, Canada, Greenland, Iceland, Scandinavia and Russia. And therein lies the simple reason for its crucial climatic role. For as long as human memory can recall, the majority of the Arctic Ocean has been covered, year-round, with a nine-foot-thick mosaic of sea ice as vast as the continental United States. Constantly moving, buckling, melting and refreezing, this blindingly white pack ice is remarkably efficient in reflecting solar radiation back into space before the sun's rays can overheat the region. The Arctic Ocean also serves as a kind of heat vent for the entire planet, taking the solar radiation that gets absorbed by the tropics and the temperate zones and, once it has moved poleward, releasing it to the atmosphere. But every year, as the 24-hour polar night shifts to 24-hour summer sunlight, more than half the pack ice melts, and when that white ice changes to dark, open water, the exposed ocean, instead of reflecting the sunlight, absorbs it and begins to warm the overlying air. And if, as a result of ever-increasing fossil-fuel emissions, the Arctic climate became too warm, it would create a ''positive feedback loop'': as the ice receded, the ocean would absorb more heat, potentially melting more ice until a cycle of heating and melting eliminated the permanent pack ice. Some computer models show that if atmospheric carbon dioxide were to double, the planet would heat up enough to melt the Arctic's summer sea ice by 2050. And if that forecast were to come true, extreme changes in the temperature and salinity of the Arctic and Nordic Seas would follow. In fact, the Arctic sea ice plays a crucial role in the circulation of ocean water for the entire planet; according to one theory, if the pack ice were to melt away completely, the fresh, frigid water cascading out of the Arctic and into the North Atlantic would stop the transport of warm water from the tropics to the high latitudes, shutting down the Gulf Stream and changing climate patterns throughout the Northern Hemisphere. With those facts, figures and drop-dead predictions in the forefront of their minds, the scientists associated with the Barrow Arctic Science Consortium work with a special sense of mission. Walt Oechel, from San Diego State University, heads a team that flies a one-man airplane over much of Alaska's North Slope in order to measure how much carbon dioxide is produced and absorbed by the thousands of square miles of tundra -- he was the first to discover that the tundra, once thought to be an absorbing sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide, had, at some point in the 1980's, become a source, in effect pumping vast new amounts of the gas into the atmosphere. Bernie Zak, from the Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M., runs the Barrow site of a Department of Energy project that, along with sites in the Great Plains and the tropical western Pacific, seeks to measure the role that clouds play in Earth's heat-exchange processes. Dan Endres, living year-round in Barrow, runs the Climate Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory station here, the government agency that, along with stations in Hawaii, American Samoa and Antarctica, produced perhaps the most famous and persuasive piece of global-warming data: the graph showing 20th-century global temperatures running -- and jumping -- in tandem with worldwide emissions of carbon dioxide. And 25 miles away, there's George in his hat and gloves, huddled over his Coleman stove, with a week's growth of beard, breath pluming from his nostrils and lips starting to crack from the cold. Within a week of our arrival, Cooper Island has lost much of its snow cover, the shoreline is beginning to emerge from its nine-month encasement in the sea ice and the mass of birds is back -- some 235 black guillemots set to breed in the dark cavities of the rusted 55-gallon drums and destroyed ammunition boxes littered across the flank of Cooper Island. To lower the risk of predation, and to save the brightest daylight hours for fishing out on the sea ice, the birds show up on Cooper only at night, usually sometime after 12, and roost on the north side of the island's main pond, calling to each other with a high-pitched, melancholy whistle. Then, once they've achieved the safety of numbers, they disperse to their nest sites and commence their breeding activities: courting and head-bobbing, strutting and exploring their nest cavities and, of course, copulating wildly. By day, without the guillemots in attendance, the island looks like what it is -- a gravel beach with trash on it. At night, however, with the birds teeming at their nest sites, the place is transformed by a hundred scenes of carnal bliss: Cooper Island, 90210. Now that the birds are back, George picks up his pace, walking all night in the wind and rain, taking detailed notes of which birds have returned, which nest sites are occupied, who is mating with whom -- all written into one of his yellow field journals with a pen taped to a footlong tent stake, the better to manipulate it while wearing two pairs of gloves. Because the birds are gone by day and here by night, George reverses his sleeping habits so that he can observe the birds from midnight until noon, then rest in the afternoon. And so that I can observe George, I do, too. But whereas the 24-hour light, the day-for-night sleep schedule and the ceaseless wind and cold all leave me disoriented -- a victim of what scientists here call Arctic brain fuzz, in which higher brain functions seem to shut down as the body works to stay warm -- George slips easily out of the diurnal rhythms of civilization and into the surreal, Cooper-driven universe, waking up cheerful and energetic after six hours of afternoon sleep. Since the sun never sets -- and won't for more than a month -- long, undifferentiated stretches of time pass on Cooper, marked only by golden, low-angle light as the sun approaches the ocean at midnight and then, some five hours later, by a gradual brightening of the sky, followed by the snow buntings' chimelike music -- a dawn chorus in a place with no dawn. We do what we can to domesticate and structure the endlessly unspooling days. Waking at 10 p. m. to a breakfast of oatmeal or pancakes, we tune the shortwave radio to NPR's ''All Things Considered.'' Then, after working through the night, we sit down to a dinner of Dinty Moore beef stew at 8 a. m., accompanied by ''Morning Edition.'' At 12, not quite certain whether it's noon or midnight, we call it a day, wish each other good night and head off to our wind-blasted tents. There, we crawl inside two sleeping bags apiece and, truly warm for the first time in 18 hours, fall instantly to sleep. Many animals that live in or migrate to the Arctic each summer have special adaptive features. Polar bears have their eight inches of blubber, ankle-high willows possess scores of extra leaves to soak up the constant light, certain birds shut down their adrenal glands for the season so that their stress response does not become the death of them. Meanwhile, George, living like a large, flightless guillemot in his own low-lying cavity, seems to manage just fine without those adaptations. After three days alone on the island, we are joined by George's field assistant, Tamara Enz. Extravagantly competent, no less hardy than George, Tamara immediately sets out to fix all of his half-baked projects -- remounting the radio antenna to improve our communication with Barrow, shoveling snow into trash bags to avoid a late-summer drought of drinking water. Refusing to work all summer crawling in and out of a three-foot-high cook tent, she also builds a structure called a weatherport -- essentially a piece of canvas stretched over an arched metal frame. The weatherport affords us a place to retreat from the wind and permits the luxury of cooking in a standing position. But because it's larger than the old cook tent, we can't seem to heat it with the propane stove; when the outside temperature is 28 degrees, the weatherport's temperature rarely reaches above 32 -- it's like entering a walk-in meat freezer with the uncomfortable sensation that we are its meat. Sitting beneath the flickering light of the propane lantern while the weatherport creaks in the wind like a ship on high seas, we huddle around the radio, listening eagerly for the weather report, and the report is always the same: highs in the upper 20's, chance of rain, flurries and fog, wind out of the northeast at 15 to 20 miles per hour. Tamara, who at 35 has spent most of her working life in field camps from Maine to Alaska, tries to put the Cooper experience in perspective for me. ''Here there's no camp cook, there's no place to go and you're on call all the time,'' she says. ''You spend all day in the rain, the wind and the cold. And to warm up, you walk around in the rain, the wind and the cold.'' George smiles at the description and says: ''I've been doing this for so long, I've lost the ability to assess what's uncomfortable. I mean, it's 32 degrees in here, and I'm working in gloves, but basically I feel good. Sure, my feet feel a little funny, and I'm losing sensation in my lower lip, and for dinner I'm drinking hot Jell-O and eating Wheat Chex melted in chicken bouillon'' -- he toasts the air with his cup -- but at 32 degrees, it tastes like mother's milk!''Over the many years George has studied his guillemots, he has developed what he refers to as the Cooper culture -- the practice of surviving on the fewest resources possible. For the most part, poverty has been the mother of invention. Though George now gets financing from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and has income from his off-season work as a seabird consultant for the council investigating the Valdez oil spill, for many years he had to cobble together his field-season budget from a half-dozen sources or, when his funds dried up completely, raise the money himself. During much of the 1980's, he had no funds, no assistant, no radio, and he lived on a diet of oatmeal and rice. To minimize his resupply costs, he'd cache his unused cans of food and fuel in the permafrost, then draw himself a map so that he could dig them up the following year. And he has taught himself time-honored survival techniques used by the Inupiats, like supplying himself with drinking water by melting multiyear sea ice, or waiting for freshwater to float to the top of the lagoon during breakup. But even now, when he has the money to prosecute his research with less day-to-day hardship, and at a time in life when many of his friends are complaining of their aches and pains, George chooses the ascetic path. ''People are always saying to me, 'Why don't you build a shack?' But I need to have a personal relationship with the birds. I need to be in their environment, to experience what the guillemots do, to know what it feels like to leave your cavity in the wind and the rain.'' Among Arctic scientists, many of whom have their data relayed to them by computer, George is an anomaly, and when he attends conferences on polar science, he sometimes gets miffed. ''I once heard someone give a paper on trace metals in Arctic water,'' he says, ''and it was clear the guy had never even been to the Arctic. I thought, I've passed more Arctic water through my bladder than you'll see in a lifetime!''George looks out the weatherport door into a swirl of fog and freezing rain. ''Do you think it's strange that I've left a series of beautiful women in April and May -- one of whom wanted me to spend the summer at her mother's Long Island summer house -- to come up here?'' He shakes his head. ''Basically it all comes down to the yellow field books at the end of the year. I mean, I actually broke up with someone here in 1980, but I look at the field books and think: 1980, now that was a good year!''In the field of ornithology, you can find other examples of scientists who have kept long-term studies going, year after year. In Great Britain, starting in the 1930's, the naturalist Ronald Lockley studied shearwaters and puffins for 20 years. In New Brunswick, Charles Huntington, a professor from Bowdoin College, has kept a study of Leach's storm petrels going since the 1950's. But in the nascent field of climatology, rare is the scientist with anything longer than a 5- or 10-year data set. That the guillemots come back year after year is, on the whole, less surprising than the fact that George does, too. In the 27 years that have elapsed since he first began his study, the dead walrus by our campsite has lost all its skin, fat and muscle; the young boy who once brought out supplies to Cooper grew up to become the mayor of the North Slope Borough; and Cooper Island itself has eroded a quarter of a mile to the northwest -- George's old campsite and airstrip on the east end are now completely underwater. When George wanders the beach, strange, ancient-seeming objects catch his eye, and he picks them up, marveling at how they could have reached Cooper Island -- before he remembers bringing them out himself more than two decades before. All of which has put him in a unique position to track changes in the Arctic climate and to make sense of large, seemingly random events that take years to figure out, like the one that began 10 years ago when the population of his guillemot colony gradually and mysteriously began to drop. Throughout the 1980's, almost 650 birds were coming to Cooper Island each summer, and with 85 percent over-winter survival, competition for the 200 or so nest sites was fierce -- one bird came back 11 years in a row before it could breed. ''It was like rent control in New York,'' George says. ''They were all waiting for someone to die.'' Then in 1995, he passed by two nest sites and saw the same male going back and forth, pairing with two females. ''I didn't believe my eyes,'' he recalls. ''I'd never seen a female without a male, I'd never seen bigamy, and as all males know, you can't keep one female happy. . . . '' Looking around his colony that year, he saw 10 more females who owned a nest site, but couldn't attract a mate. Something, apparently, was decreasing adult survival. A second clue came four years later, when George noticed a lot of sibling aggression among chicks -- a sign that food was scarce. And at several nest sites, he saw something else he'd never seen before: orphaned chicks, not yet able to fledge, starving and walking away from their nests toward shore in search of foster parents and food. ''It was pretty disturbing. I picked up one chick, and it was more stress than he could take -- he died right in my hands.'' Something was decreasing adult survival, and something, apparently, was killing off chicks. If George's colony had consisted of any bird besides a black guillemot, his investigation of this gradual population drop might never have led him to look for answers in the Arctic environment. Arctic terns, for example, winter in Antarctica and fly 25,000 miles each year -- through the tropics, through the temperate zones -- before arriving in the Arctic to breed; anything between the earth's two poles could cause them to die off. Similarly, glaucous gulls, though not particularly migratory, feed on human sources of food like dumps and carrion, and therefore pick up anthropogenic contaminants that could confound interpretation. George's guillemots, on the other hand, spend their whole annual cycle in the Arctic -- wintering from September to May in the pack ice of the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas, then coming to Cooper Island to breed. As George puts it, ''They're not temperate-zone birds just slumming it in the Arctic.'' The guillemots feed at the ice edge all year long, where prey is most plentiful; they feed only on other Arctic organisms like cod and zooplankton; and they have a long, 80-day breeding cycle that they must wedge into the brief Arctic summer, which starts with the snow melt in June and goes right up to the first snowfall of the year in September. They are creatures, in other words, wholly dependent on snow and ice habitats sustained by them, restricted by them and adapted to them -- they are captive to the Arctic environment and thus the first to reflect a change. And George, no less captive to the snow and ice of Cooper Island, began to see a correlation: when the polar pack ice remained up against the shores of Cooper Island, as it did in the 1970's and 1980's, his guillemots -- able to feed easily from the nearby ice edge with its great density of prey -- had fabulous breeding success. When warmer summer temperatures caused the pack ice to pull offshore and retreat northward out of sight, as it did through the 1990's, his birds were unable to reach the ice edge and began to die off. By 1999, when a series of papers came out describing a major retreat and thinning of the Arctic pack ice due not only to gradually warmer temperatures, but also to a decadelong upper atmospheric shift called the Arctic Oscillation, George was in a position to put the pieces together. His colony was not merely tracking the advancement of snow melt and the earlier arrival of summer; it was also articulating a change in the very makeup of the Arctic itself -- the shrinking of the polar ice cap -- with all its potentially drastic worldwide consequences. George, of course, is not the only scientist tracking the physical and biological affects of a warmer climate -- permafrost melting, coastlines eroding, moose expanding northward, walruses losing ice habitat on which to pup and hunt. But when it comes to relating such observations to the larger, slow-moving story of climate change, those data sets are useful only in direct proportion to their longevity and depth. And whereas some scientists find the long-distance work of climatology tedious and lacking in the kinds of signal events that grab people's attention, George is undeterred, married as he is to the year-to-year process. It's interesting to consider: if George had begun his study five years ago, he would have missed the advancement in snow melt, the advancement of summer. If he'd begun his work as far back as 1990, he could never have connected the colony's population drop with the retreat of the pack ice. Having amassed a continuous, eyewitness data set for 27 years, however, he was watching the climate change not only in year-to-year increments but also in shifts from decade to decade, which has enabled him to see through the static of natural climatic cycles like the Arctic Oscillation, which may warm the region one decade, then cool it the next.''I sometimes forget that there's no other island in the Arctic where someone has gone back for 27 years,'' he says, cinching his hood and drawing up his face mask, preparing to leave the weatherport. ''Now I feel totally obligated to keep the study going. People say, 'Couldn't you just take a year off?' But if I skip a year, then it's lost. I only have one chance.'' He opens the weatherport door, and the wind nearly snaps it off its hinges. ''I don't want to sound like the Old Man of the Arctic, but I can remember the year the ice did this, the year the snow did that. I have the data set, I've got the numbers. It may be that I came back to Cooper all these years simply because I have minor attention deficit disorder, or all this summer sunlight has given me an addiction to high serotonin levels. But it meant something to me in a way that wasn't abstract. I was there. I saw it. And I saw it because I was there, living in my tent.''V: IN WHICH GEORGE SEES INTO THE PASTThe farther north you travel in this hemisphere, the more you hear conversations about the climate getting conducted not in the future, but in the present tense. In Whitehorse, the capital of Canada's Yukon Territory, officials now hold an annual exposition showcasing products to help residents mitigate and adapt to an already warmer climate. In Barrow, the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission spent a large part of its annual convention last year discussing, among other things, the perils of hunting bowhead whales from increasingly thinner ice. Some Alaskan natives, mindful that ''traditional knowledge'' is often considered merely anecdotal and lacking in scientific rigor, have set up a Web site (nativeknowledge. org), on which you can see two thousand people sharing much the same anecdotes: turtles appearing for the first time on Kodiak Island, birds starving on St. Lawrence Island, thunder first heard on Little Diomede Island, coastal storms undercutting houses at Shishmaref, snowmobiles falling through the ice in Nenana. . . . Already the central Arctic is warming 10 times as fast as the rest of the planet, outpacing even our attempts to describe it. In Canada's Northwest Territories, Inuit Eskimos saw their first robin last summer, though there's no word in Inuit for ''robin.''Those who remain skeptical that the Arctic is undergoing a period of rapid climate change point out that the region has always gone through cycles of warming and cooling, sometimes in just decades or even years. Perhaps, according to this argument, natural fluctuations cause the water to warm and cool, and the ice to thin and thicken as atmospheric pressures, water currents and wind patterns change. But the latest findings coming out of the Arctic suggesting a longer-term trend are hard to dismiss, even if their ramifications may not be felt elsewhere for many years. Recently unclassified submarine data, for example, show that the ocean's covering of snow and ice has thinned in some places by up to four feet, or 40 percent, since the 1960's. And satellite data indicate that the ice's reach has receded at a rate of 3 percent per decade since the 1970's. Recently, warmer, saltier water from the North Atlantic has crept farther into the Arctic basin than ever seen before. And that water is about 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than it was only a decade ago, causing further melting. Current models predict that global temperatures will rise by between 0.9 and 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit by 2050. And the rate of increase could be three to five times higher in the Arctic. For their part, the black guillemots of Cooper Island cannot foretell the future. But just this past year George did devise an ingenious way for his birds to narrate the past. In the feathers of any guillemot are a host of chemical compounds that reveal aspects of its physiology, and one such compound -- a naturally occurring carbon isotope called delta 13C -- gives, in effect, a snapshot of what that bird has eaten from the carbon-based food chain in the past six months, just as a human autopsy can reveal the deceased's last meal. Since each region of the Arctic also has a different carbon signature -- the sub-Arctic Bering Sea, for example, is biologically highly productive and therefore possesses more of the isotope than the more northerly Beaufort and Chukchi Seas -- a particular feather's delta 13C content can identify not just what that bird may have eaten, but also where. Knowing that delta 13C is permanently preserved in feathers; knowing, too, that many Barrow-area guillemots going back as far as the 1880's had been shot, stuffed and housed in museum collections throughout the country, George sought permission to analyze those birds' feathers in order to compare them with feathers taken from his Cooper Island colony. Permission was granted, and guillemot feathers going back 120 years arrived at his Seattle home from collections in Philadelphia, Fairbanks and several points in between. George immediately sent them off to a lab, and when he plotted his data on a map, the results were startling. While the delta 13C content of the 19th-century birds was quite high, suggesting they'd had to fly as far south as the Bering Sea in winter to find ice cracks in order to fish, the more recent feathers possessed far less of the isotope, indicating that the birds had been able to winter some 500 miles to the north, in the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. It suggested that over the past 120 years increasingly warmer temperatures were causing the pack ice to recede, causing cracks to open up farther and farther north. In effect, George had taken his 27-year study and back-cast it to show that guillemots were tracking more than a century of warming.''Skeptics can always find fault with the instrumentation used to take temperatures back in the 1880's,'' he says. ''But with the carbon isotope, it shows a huge decrease in delta 13C from 1880 to the present, which only makes sense if the birds were wintering farther and farther to the north. It's incredibly powerful. It's more than a hundred years. And it is,'' he says in a moment of gravity, ''the only interpretation of this data.''VI: IN WHICH GEORGE CONFRONTS HIS OWN MORTALITYCooper Island, June 18, 2 o'clock in the afternoon. In the huge amphitheater of the sky, several weather systems are playing simultaneously -- rain to the south, cumulus clouds to the north -- but for the moment the feature attraction is directly overhead: azure skies, not a cloud above, and the sun warming the air to an astonishing 35 degrees. With no wind for the first time in over two weeks (and no trees to rustle in a breeze), the island's birds have complete dominance of the sound stage: honk of geese, warble of snow buntings and -- the soundtrack of the Arctic -- the upward yodeling of long-tailed ducks as they fly in perfect V-formation above our heads. My, what a beautiful day!The good weather is of more than passing interest to us right now. Four days ago, just minutes before he was scheduled to airlift me off the island and resupply George and Tamara with food, Gary Quarles radioed that he wouldn't be coming out after all. With the sky thick with fog, visibility was dangerously low, he said. And besides, Barrow Search and Rescue was short two pilots and had put him on 24-hour call. He'd get out to Cooper as soon as possible, he promised, weather permitting. But that was four days ago, and though we keep gazing up, looking for signs of our deliverance, there has been no indication of a chopper in the sky. For George, this is how it always goes. One year, he ran out of food on Cooper and radioed to Barrow, arranging for resupply, but the dispatcher went on vacation without forwarding George's message, and two weeks passed before someone happened to walk by the radio and heard his plaintive voice: ''This is Cooper Island, can you read me?'' Now, sitting outside the weatherport in the uncommon sunshine, he shrugs and says, ''Nothing to do but hope the weather stays clear and look forward to some very positive news. I'd say you're getting the full Cooper now.''In the course of his 27-year study, George has not missed a single summer on Cooper Island, but there was a time in the mid-90's when he thought of giving it up. Back in Seattle, in what he refers to as ''the dark years,'' his marriage was coming apart, he needed to spend more time with his school-age son, Karl, and he began to doubt the value of all this work. ''Like it or not,'' he says, ''I've had a number of relationships go to hell because I always leave on June 1, saying, 'I'm going to the moon -- goodbye.' And the financial commitment is not insignificant. And so, up to 1995, there was a feeling of -- Wait a minute. What's going on here? Is this just another study with utility to only a subset of ornithologists? What have I done with my life?' '' But when, rather suddenly, his bird study began to intersect with the larger story of climate change, George recommitted to Cooper Island and his colony of guillemots in ways he'd never imagined. Among his colleagues in Barrow, George is a local hero for the tenacity he has shown out on Cooper Island. And his graph displaying the advancement of egg-laying among his colony of guillemots has been given a special place of honor on the wall of the Climate Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory in Barrow, next to the graphs of several multimillion-dollar government studies. But aside from completing his dissertation in 1998 and having an article accepted by the academic journal Arctic, he hasn't published his results or sought a wider audience. And when I ask him why that is, he looks down, he removes and cleans his glasses with his shirt, and when he looks up again, he speaks in a slow, deliberate voice. ''It makes me feel really bad that I haven't gotten this out earlier,'' he begins. ''And so it's hard for me to talk about. I think that whatever characteristics cause people to do long-term studies are somehow linked to their not wanting or needing to be published. But I don't want to make excuses. I'm 55. My father died when he was 54. I don't want to say that I outlived my dad and then fritter away the next 20 years. Or die and have someone say of me, 'He had a data set that could have really added to the debate.' Now,'' he goes on, ''there's almost an obligation. Especially with George Bush in office, and people saying, 'Is climate change real?' You still get these people who say, 'Do you really think it's happening?' and I'm, like, 'What is it you don't understand?!' It needs to get out, and it needs to get out soon. People say that it's happening naturally, and why should we worry? But the world may not have the stability we think it has. This,'' he says, gesturing around the island, ''is evidence that stasis isn't operating.''George does not involve himself with the various strategies -- conservation, reducing fossil-fuel emissions, reforestation programs -- that may if not reverse then at least mitigate what the vast majority of scientists now believe to be a worldwide warming trend driven in part by human activity. As George sees it, his job is to question and observe until he fully understands the workings of his own particular planet -- this strip of sand and gravel 25 miles off the coast of North America. But to witness all the changes that have come to Cooper Island and its birds over the past 30 years is to wonder when those changes will work their way up the food chain to us, despite civilization's capacity to buffer us from the day-to-day pressures of natural selection that formed the species as we know it. To be stranded on Cooper Island is to be reminded of the larger sphere on which we are all confined, along with all the changes we may have wrought. George shakes his head and looks off. ''Aside from the nuclear threat,'' he says, ''there hasn't been much in science that has the potential to affect a larger percentage of the population's everyday life.''And so, George is stepping up the pace. Having all but abandoned his original ornithological inquiry in favor of an all-out assault on Arctic warming, he plans to put a portable weather station on Cooper to get more precise correlations between the climate and his birds. He has talked to a scientist with a robotic airplane about flying out to Cooper to photograph the island from a bird's-eye view. He plans to begin sampling fat in chicks and adult guillemots to see if their nutrition can be related to ice conditions. And he has applied for a berth on a government icebreaker cruise next year to study the guillemots' winter habitat out on the ice. Finally, at long last, Dave Ramey's voice comes over the radio, informing us that Quarles is on his way. And within half an hour, we can see his helicopter cruising toward us over the ice of Elson Lagoon. After two and a half weeks spent on Cooper Island time, my departure seems to occur in fast-forward. The helicopter touches down by the weatherport in a swirl of dust and gravel. With Quarles waving me in, I bid a hasty farewell to George and Tamara. And after I throw in my packs and jump on board, we lift off in the deafening roar of the rotar-chop. As we climb into the sky, Cooper Island begins to recede and lose detail. Out on the ocean, a line of pressure ridges -- huge, colliding slabs of blue-green sea ice -- rises up like the skyline of a distant city. Above them, a thin dark line of cloud -- what the Inupiat call ''water sky'' -- reveals the invisible presence of an ice crack out on the horizon. Give or take a passing icebreaker, or a native hunter looking for seals from an ice floe, the next group of human beings is probably in Svalbard, Norway, on the other side of the globe. By the time we reach our cruising altitude of 1,000 feet, Cooper Island is just a patch of gravel in the vastness of the frozen ocean. From up here there's a temptation to employ the tropes of a hundred nature writers, to think of Cooper -- of the Arctic in its entirety -- as some distant, untouched environment, following only the rhythms of nature that the Alaskan poet John Haines once wrote of: ''A place where the clocks are stilled and the sun still holds some of its ancient power; another kind of rhythm dominates existence: When the ice goes out, when the fish come, when the geese and ducks begin to gather.'' But already those rhythms have been disrupted. The birds come back to the island earlier and earlier each year, the ice pulls offshore and the birds starve. And if the seas do rise, even Cooper Island, at nine feet above sea level, will go under. It may take years -- it may not happen in his lifetime -- but George plans to get himself a raft, just in case. When I look below me, I can barely find the weatherport and the three yellow domes. But then I spot George out by the north beach, knees bent, telephoto scope up to his eye. Clinging to the frozen rim of the inhabited world, with his levitating tents and his wavering radio antenna, his shotgun and his limp polar-bear fence, he looks to the skies and waits. Darcy Frey is the author of ''The Last Shot: City Streets, Basketball Dreams.''

WHEN George W. Bush stepped up to his inaugural podium a year ago today, his view of the world still mystified America, its allies and its enemies. He had made clear what he didn't like -- using American troops for peacekeeping in the Balkans, the Kyoto treaty on global warming, an arms control treaty with Russia that prevented missile defenses. But apart from his conviction that America should lead and the rest of the world should follow, it was hard to tell just where he thought the United States fit into the world. A year into Mr. Bush's presidency, the world looks very different -- and so do his skills, though not necessarily his attitudes. His national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, describes Mr. Bush's America as ''a hub around which the president can coalesce others to get things done.''The surprise for a lot of people was that Mr. Bush, a year out of Texas, demonstrated his father's touch for dealing with foreign leaders when he needed them in a crisis, persuading them that in joining America they were also defending themselves. Inside the White House, the biggest fear about Mr. Bush's second year is that there could be more acts of terror on American soil. But once terrorism is contained and the task ahead is how to manage a peaceful world, the biggest test may lie in how well Mr. Bush uses America's position at the hub to  extend its influence. That was the problem that plagued Woodrow Wilson and Mr. Bush's father, and turned Harry Truman into a favorite of presidential historians. And that takes a different set of skills, chief among them an empathy for the national interests of allies, partners and defeated enemies. For if they wander away from the building of peace, it's as if the war was never won. In retrospect, what made President Bush so effective in the weeks after Sept. 11 was exactly the characteristic that lent itself to  parody in the months before -- his proclivity to describe the world in black-and-white terms. For a world accustomed to the muted tones of the Clinton administration, in which Iraq and North Korea became ''states of concern'' and almost every other country was an ''emerging market,'' Mr. Bush's phrases seemed simplistic. But his blunt vocabulary ''enabled him to say, 'These guys are bad, we're going to go get them,' and then to turn it over to the military to do exactly that,'' said Michael Mandelbaum, a political scientist. ''He was able to set a clear, achievable goal, and that's not what we associate with American foreign policy in the Clinton era, or even before.''The approach proved startlingly effective at gaining international support, partly because Mr. Bush's call for a war against terrorism with a ''global reach'' gave Russia a new lease on its battle with the Chechens, the Philippines a new impetus to take on rebels in its southern islands, Israel a new way to define the Palestinians, and China an excuse to chase after Muslim separatists. For a while, many speculated that the war would also tame Mr. Bush's instinct to go it alone, that over time it would make him better attuned to the resentments bred by America's size and its economic reach. But in December he called his crucial partner in the battle against terrorism, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, and told him that he was walking away from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. Visitors to the Oval Office say they think Mr. Bush's success in Afghanistan has only reinforced his determination to go his own way -- with allies if they want to join the ride, alone if they don't.''I sense he is trying harder to understand how the rest of the world views America,'' the prime minister of Greece, Costas Simitis, said after a recent visit with Mr. Bush. But in the next breath he said Mr. Bush had cautioned him that American troops wouldn't stay in the Balkans forever, and Mr. Simitis warned of the ''dangerous symbolism'' if America seemed unwilling to keep the uneasy peace it had helped win. But Ms. Rice argues that Mr. Bush was no ''unilateralist'' last Jan. 20, and no more of one today. ''I think all of this about multilateralism versus unilateralism really stemmed from the rejection of a few bad treaties, that were lowest-common-denominator treaties, in which the United States should not have been involved because they were not going to solve the problems that they purported to solve,'' she said. She ticked off the Kyoto treaty on global warming, the establishment of an international criminal court and the biological weapons protocol. Other, more brittle elements of Mr. Bush's worldview of last Jan. 20 have given way. Mr. Bush insists that no American forces will be keeping the peace in Afghanistan, but as Secretary of State Colin L. Powell seemed to hint on a brief stopover in Kabul last week, it may not be that simple. Mr. Bush is being forced to consider a bigger American role, lest he repeat one of his father's mistakes: allowing a power vacuum in a lawless Afghanistan, which eventually made it ripe for terrorists. As Sept. 11 recedes, another aspect of Mr. Bush's outlook seems likely to take center stage: his ''tough love'' approach to countries that cannot manage their own economic affairs, and his willingness to let nonstrategic allies sink. When Argentina headed toward collapse, he expressed sympathy but argued that America could not help until Argentina's leaders got on the path to fiscal discipline and banned all talk of reversing American-style reforms. In Mr. Bush's view, American power is for keeping the peace and ending the scourge of terrorism, but not for micro-managing the affairs of other countries in a global economy. Those who play by American rules get to play in America's league. Those who don't get sent to the minors. So far, it's worked. But it's doubtful that if 2002 is marked by more economic collapses that threaten global financial stability -- and thus America's own delicate financial health -- Mr. Bush will be able to afford such a hands-off approach. It's one thing to let Argentina sink or swim. It's another if Japan's recession and deflation produce a deeper crisis and the president seems aloof from the details.''If Japan goes the way of Argentina, no one will be able to say, 'Too bad, but good luck,' '' one senior State Department official who sits in on the administration's strategy sessions said. ''Sept. 11 reminded us that our military can do amazing things, and that we can still build alliances in a crisis. But that's different from global management.''

The Bush administration has done well militarily in Afghanistan, but it has badly fumbled the question of justice for its captives. It has failed to understand the power of the human rights ideal in today's world -- and America's stake in living up to that ideal. The failure has brought awkward international political consequences for the United States. The imprisonment of Taliban and Qaeda captives at Guantnamo, and their treatment there, have been questioned by some of America's closest allies. The European Union's external affairs commissioner, Chris Patten, said the perception that the captives are being mistreated -- or may be sentenced to death -- ''would be a way of losing international support and losing the moral high ground.'' The two leading British newspaper columnists, Hugo Young of The Guardian and Philip Stephens of The Financial Times, wrote critical columns. All this has put the Bush administration on the defensive. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld devoted an entire press briefing to defending the Guantnamo camp against what he called baseless critical ''hyperbole.''Most Americans probably reject the foreign criticism. What accounts for the stark difference on this issue between us and people abroad who are usually staunchly pro-American? America was the target of the Sept. 11 attacks, and Americans may understandably have stronger feelings against terrorists now. Britain, Spain and other European nations that have had much experience with terrorism do not feel so freshly vulnerable. Then there is the death penalty. All European countries have given it up, and leaders from politicians to the pope deplore what they regard as the savage survival of executions here. Underneath, the prisoner issue touches a profound resentment abroad at what many see as an American tendency to lecture others about international standards while refusing  to comply with those it urges. The human rights movement in the world got its main start in the United States. Thirty years ago Congress began imposing sanctions on countries that violate human rights. The United States pushed the United Nations to create the International War Crimes Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Yet the Bush administration is trying to sabotage establishment of an international court for war crimes that all our allies support. The administration has also troubled some friendly governments by withdrawing from the Kyoto treaty on global warming and the Antiballistic Missile Treaty. Charles Grant, director of the Center for European Reform, a London research group, said the Guantnamo issue touches ''European concern that America doesn't believe . . . in submitting itself to rules, organizations or norms that limit its freedom of action.''European unease about the legal side of the American war on terrorism goes back before Guantnamo to President Bush's order calling for military tribunals to try non-American citizens involved in terrorism. Objections in Europe made it doubtful that we could win extradition orders for suspects arrested there. The tribunal order has turned out to be an embarrassment for the administration. It has used civilian courts for the first terrorist prosecutions, undermining its argument that they could not be trusted for such cases. In Guantnamo, too, the administration has created unnecessary complications. It has tried to justify its treatment of prisoners by arguing that they are not war prisoners but ''unlawful combatants.'' ''These people are committed terrorists,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. But whether they are is the very question that a legal process must decide. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 say they must be considered prisoners of war unless a ''competent tribunal'' finds otherwise. The handling of the prisoners in Camp X-Ray has given the United States a self-inflicted wound. Fencing around with legalistic reasons to deny them rights due prisoners of war convinces hardly anyone. The administration should have learned by now that the world may be with us in fighting terrorism, but it wants to hold us to our professed ideals.''Whatever the legal rights and wrongs,'' Philip Stephens of The Financial Times wrote, ''the politics of Camp X-Ray are terrible. . . . As it confronts the authors of Sept. 11, the United States must demonstrate at every turn that it is on the side of civilized values.''Anthony Lewis is a former Times columnist.

One of President Bush's assistants said recently that if the president chose to model himself on anyone, it would be Theodore Roosevelt. As regards environmental policy, surely an important component of Roosevelt's legacy, we fail to see the comparison. Roosevelt started the national wildlife refuge system. Mr. Bush sees the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge as a source of oil. Roosevelt greatly expanded the national forests. Mr. Bush would shrink important protections for those forests. For conservationists, Mr. Bush's first year was a big disappointment, yielding little more than a few promises. It's possible that he may yet do good things for the national parks, despite his fixation on letting snowmobiles roam as free as the bison in Yellowstone. He has also promised full funding for the government's main land acquisition program, and promoted the redevelopment of contaminated industrial sites known as brownfields. On most major issues, however -- clean air, clean water, the protection of the public lands from commercial exploitation -- he has retreated or signaled retreat from the policies of his predecessor. Unless Mr. Bush himself alters course, the prospects for improvement are zero. That is because he has filled nearly all the critical posts where policy is hatched and regulations written with people who regard the environment as a resource to be exploited and who have earned their keep representing logging, mining, oil, livestock and other interests. The one faint hope in this dreary landscape is Christie Whitman, the boss of the Environmental Protection Agency. But apart from a brave decision directing General Electric to clean up the Hudson River, Mrs. Whitman has essentially been running in place. A big victory for her is upholding a rule written in the Clinton administration. Meanwhile, the field is littered with broken promises. The biggest was Mr. Bush's abandonment on March 13 of his campaign promise to reduce industrial emissions of carbon dioxide. This decision foreshadowed his withdrawal two weeks later from the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, as well as the unveiling in May of his broader energy strategy, which favors precisely the same fossil fuels that are believed to cause the warming problem. There were less dramatic betrayals as well. At his confirmation hearings, for example, Attorney General John Ashcroft pledged to defend as the ''law of the land'' a landmark Clinton-era rule barring logging and other forms of commercial development in 58.5 million acres of roadless national forest. Mr. Ashcroft's lawyers have since done almost nothing to defend the rule against court challenges from industry, a failure that has encouraged the timber lobbyists who now run the Forest Service to proceed with their parallel campaign to destroy the roadless policy by administrative means. Mr. Ashcroft's negative handiwork is everywhere. Three days after Mrs. Whitman upheld a Clinton rule protecting wetlands, his lawyers opened settlement talks with developers seeking to weaken the rule. That, in turn, can only encourage the Army Corps of Engineers in its parallel efforts to undermine other aspects of wetlands law. Such are the destructive synergies at work in the Bush administration. The only person who can turn things around is Mr. Bush, so strong is the mindset of his retainers. Will he? At the moment, he is riding high, and issues like the environment do not loom large. Yet ever since the landmark conservation laws enacted three decades ago under another Republican, Richard Nixon, Americans have demonstrated a commitment to environmental values that transcends party. In times of conflict or economic crisis, this commitment recedes. But it always comes back, and politicians who ignore it pay dearly.

The California Assembly passed a bill on Wednesday that would set the  first standards in the nation for regulating automotive emissions of a greenhouse gas. Environmentalists viewed the action as a major victory, but automakers, which are expected to challenge regulation in court if the bill becomes law, criticized it. The bill passed 42 to 24, which barely exceeded the 41 votes needed for passage. Only two Republicans voted for the bill, and no Democrats opposed it. Ten Democrats and 4 Republicans did not vote. The bill is expected to have an easier time in the Senate, also ruled by Democrats, and with Gov. Gray Davis, a Democrat. The bill would regulate tailpipe emission of carbon dioxide, which many scientists believe is the chief contributor to global warming. It would require the California Air Resources Board to write the regulations by January 2004 and put them into effect by January 2005. The auto industry argues that while catalytic converters can reduce pollution from cars and trucks, the only way to reduce emission of carbon dioxide is to drive less.''There is no device you can add to a vehicle to reduce carbon dioxide,'' said Gloria J. Bergquist, a spokeswoman for the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, which includes the Big Three and Toyota. As a result, the alliance said, federal fuel economy regulations would pre-empt any action by California. Environmentalists argue that improvements can be made with more efficient tires and fuels and by encouraging public transportation.''There are a lot of ways the car companies could meet this obligation without addressing the actual fuel economy under the hood,'' said Julia Levin, the California policy coordinator for the Union of Concerned Scientists. Environmentalists said action in California could have broad effects.''The world's largest auto market is about to begin controlling global warming pollution from automobiles,'' said Daniel F. Becker, director of global warming for the Sierra Club, ''and that puts an enormous amount of pressure on the Congress and the auto industry.''But automakers, who expect a drop in sales and face declining profits and having to lay off tens of thousands of workers, are not eager for new regulations.''It's a very big issue,'' Ms. Bergquist said, ''and based on prior experience, we fear the worst.''For environmentalists, the California Assembly's action is the best news on global warming since their setback last year when the Bush administration announced that the United States would not sign the Kyoto Protocol, a global plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Not all automakers are as firm as the Big Three in opposing action on greenhouse gases. Honda, which is not a member of the automotive alliance, said yesterday that it was not against regulating such emissions but opposed it at the state level.'' ''If the states act unilaterally,'' Ed Cohen, Honda's vice president of government and industry relations, said, ''we'll end up with a patchwork of approaches.''

After months of internal debate, the Bush administration has outlined a climate policy that calls for a far more gradual approach to global warming than the one in a 1997 treaty endorsed by most nations. White House officials said yesterday that President Bush had still not settled on details. But a report on the economy published by the White House yesterday spelled out its philosophy on the contentious issue of limiting emissions of gases linked to global warming. In contrast to the hard targets and short timetable in the 1997 treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, the administration's policy calls for technology and incentives that would lead to a decades-long decline in emissions, according to officials involved in the policy debate and experts consulted by the administration. Pressure has been rising on Mr. Bush to come up with specifics as the Senate develops bills aimed at controlling power-plant emissions -- including carbon dioxide, the main gas that traps heat in the atmosphere, warming Earth like a greenhouse. The president is planning to visit Asia late next week, and Japan is eager to see some indication of climate policy in view of Mr. Bush's rejection of the Kyoto Protocol. While most nations have endorsed it, few have ratified it. Japanese officials have said they will be most likely to pursue ratification if they see signs that the United States may eventually act to limit warming. The administration's approach is described in six pages of the 440-page Economic Report of the President, released by the White House Council of Economic Advisers.''The uncertainty surrounding the science of climate change suggests that some modesty is in order,'' it reads. ''We need to recognize that it makes sense to discuss slowing emission growth before trying to stop and eventually reverse it.'' (The report is available on the Web at www. whitehouse. gov/cea/pubs.)The report also discusses the merits of measuring countries' production of greenhouse gases against their economic production. This reflects Mr. Bush's first speech on climate change, in June, in which he admitted that the United States is by far the biggest source of greenhouse gases (about 20 percent of the total) but defended that rate as a reflection of the country's enormous output of goods and services (about 25 percent of the world's total). In a speech in December, R. Glenn Hubbard, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, said the science remained too equivocal to pursue ''a premature Kyoto-style agreement.''The report yesterday echoed that theme: ''The current uncertainty surrounding climate change implies that a realistic policy should involved a gradual, measured response, not a risky, precipitous one.''Many environmental groups and economists have called for limits on emissions, combined with a system that allows companies to exceed the caps by ''trading'' with other companies. For example, a power company that emits carbon dioxide might buy credits from a paper company that is growing forests, which absorb carbon dioxide. The administration has long been divided over such a system, with some cabinet members and senior White House officials favoring it and others, led by Vice President Dick Cheney, strongly opposed. The new document said such a system sometimes made sense, pointing to the trading system for reducing sulfur releases linked to acid rain. But it also said greenhouse gases would be much more difficult to measure, monitor and trade. ''It would be dangerous to make any serious U.S. policy or commitment dependent on newly designed and untried international institutions,'' the report said. Some environmental groups challenged assertions in the document. The World Resources Institute, for instance, said setting emission rates as a percentage of economic growth would never reduce overall emissions, only slow their increase. But Dr. John M. Reilly, an economist at the M.I.T. Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, who analyzed various scenarios for the White House, said the general approach made sense.''Starting slow and building up is a well-established economic idea,'' Dr. Reilly said. ''You don't want to suddenly shock the economy by saying you have to reduce by 30 percent tomorrow.''Under the Kyoto plan, by 2012 the United States would have had to cut emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases to roughly 30 percent below projected levels. But in the absence of stringent requirements, Dr. Reilly said, the government needs to offer strong incentives if companies are to seek out innovations that might solve the problem. In the end, he said, some limit on emissions must be set if emissions are to drop. As he put it, ''The basic story is, if a problem is going to solve itself, then it's not a problem.''

In the courtrooms at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia you find the Euro-utilitarian furnishings and sober drone of a Dutch insurance company, which is exactly what the building housed until a few years ago. The defendants, too, are surprisingly ordinary, deprived of whatever strut and menace they had when they were lords of the Balkans. The other day I looked in on the trial of one Stanislav Galic, who reminded me of my high school swimming coach. Mr. Galic is accused of commanding the Bosnian Serb sadists who turned the streets of civilized Sarajevo into a shooting gallery, shelling families as they queued for bread or attended funerals. The trial, like most trials, is a tedious accumulation of detail, the bookkeeping of heartbreak. Hours are spent pinning down the precise location of a tram at the moment sniper bullets pierced its windows, hitting a woman and her 4-year-old daughter. This is where the banality of evil meets the banality of justice. Next Tuesday the chief among the monsters of Yugoslavia begins his turn in the dock. Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of the former Yugoslavia, the author of three horrible wars of ethnic cleansing in the heart of Europe, and now a sulky, self-pitying defendant, goes on trial as a war criminal. You might think all of this would be a bonanza for an American administration seeking to assure the world, in particular the Islamic world, that American power can be a force for good. The United States was instrumental in delivering these men to justice -- many of them, including Mr. Milosevic, on President Bush's watch. The trial is also a reminder that the West did (after much dithering) send warplanes to save the lives of Muslim Bosnians and Muslim Albanians from the incited wrath of their Serbian neighbors. And the calm, fastidious ministrations of law here exemplify the ''non-negotiable demands of human dignity'' that Mr. Bush described in his State of the Union speech as the heart of America's mission in the world. Mr. Milosevic will be treated to a trial no tyrant, no terror-master, no rogue regime would stand for, a trial in which the outcome has not been ordained. At a time when resentment of American power festers not only in the Arab world but in the Waldorf-Astoria, to judge by the hectoring at the recent World Economic Forum, this is an opportunity for the United States to glory a little in its moral superiority. Curiously, this is a bonanza the administration has chosen not to reap. No one thought to write an applause line into the State of the Union address mentioning America's role in bringing Mr. Milosevic to justice. So far the White House seems just slightly more enthusiastic about this trial than Mr. Milosevic himself, and Mr. Milosevic has done everything short of mooning the judges. What's missing here? It's tempting to say this is just another manifestation of the Bush administration's instinct to go it alone, like dropping out of the Kyoto global warming treaty, but it is not nearly so simple. Probably one factor is that, in the Bush lexicon, Yugoslavia stands for the wrong kind of American intervention -- peacekeeping, nation-building, do-gooder foreign policy driven more by compassion than by our national interest. Grudgingly, Mr. Bush has accepted the inherited duty to stick with NATO in policing the Balkans, though there is still a residue of scorn for the idea that this is a meritorious use of America might. But the main reason you have not heard the administration crowing about Mr. Milosevic is that this trial represents the high-water mark of a rising world enthusiasm for international criminal courts. The specialized tribunal on Yugoslavia and a similar court that is litigating the genocidal slaughter in Rwanda have helped convince 139 nations that the world needs a permanent International Criminal Court to judge atrocities committed in the name of war. The idea is that a standing court would develop a pool of legal expertise and credibility in these difficult-to-prosecute crimes, that it would serve as a check on cyclical vengeance, and that it might even give pause to some future monster. Fifty-two of those signatory nations, including many of our closest allies, have formally ratified the treaty creating the court; when that number hits 60, perhaps within a year, the court is born. The Clinton administration signed the treaty, saying it still needed improvement. Mr. Bush, prodded by the Pentagon and backed by Congress, is strongly against ratification and vows to have nothing to do with it; the administration is still discussing whether to launch an active campaign to undermine the court, or merely keep a chilly distance from it. This is not an easy call. The fact is, a lot of Americans, and not just Bush Republicans, have misgivings about the prospect that an American could be dragged from under the shelter of our Constitution and tried before an international court. A number of people who publicly endorse the international court privately admit that some aspects of it give them pause. Like the tribunal, the permanent court would employ a hybrid legal system, lacking some features Americans take for granted. There is a three-judge panel in place of a jury, and two can convict. Prosecutors can appeal an acquittal, which U.S. law regards as double jeopardy. The roster of judges is international, and draws on some countries you may not think of as bastions of judicial integrity -- China, to pick on one. For all that, American jurists who have participated give the court here high marks. Patricia M. Wald, a respected federal judge who recently completed a two-year appellate tour on the Yugoslavia tribunal, where she shocked her colleagues by throwing out three convictions for weak evidence, told me she would have no qualms about seeing an American put on trial here. ''I'm a skeptic of everything, and I would watch very carefully,'' she said. ''But I think with all the checks and balances, I wouldn't be uncomfortable.''The graver fear is that a permanent international court, with a broader license and vaguer accountability, would become a forum for mischievous anti-Americanism. The new court is intended as a tribunal of last resort, for countries unable (like Rwanda) or unwilling (like Yugoslavia) to handle their own colossal messes. The court is supposed to step aside when countries agree to investigate allegations against their own citizens. But the decision to prosecute would rest with prosecutors and judges ultimately accountable to an amorphous assembly of everyone who signed the treaty. American negotiators fought unsuccessfully for some stronger safeguards, like a requirement that the U.N. Security Council, where America has a veto, be required to sign off on indictments. The administration worries that American soldiers or American officials deployed abroad would be ripe targets for politically motivated prosecutors. The next thing you know, Henry Kissinger will be a few cells down from Mr. Milosevic, standing trial for war crimes in Vietnam and half a dozen other venues, as the writer Christopher Hitchens proposed in a polemic last year. In the real world, though, Americans have little to fear, with or without a permanent international court. Why? First, because the countries that care about war crimes tend to be liberal democracies that have enough to do without global grandstanding, and second, because America's diplomatic, economic and military leverage is a strong disincentive. When Mr. Milosevic sneers at the tribunal here as ''victor's justice,'' he is not entirely wrong.''No international tribunal will ever hold Russia to account for Chechnya, or China for Tiananmen Square or Tibet, let alone the U.S.,'' said Gary J. Bass, author of an unsentimental book on the politics of war-crimes tribunals. ''This is an international implement that's going to be used by stronger powers against weaker powers. So why are we afraid of it?''Certainly America-haters will try to use an international court against us. Let them try. They are likely to get as far as Mr. Milosevic got when he exhorted the prosecutor here to charge the United States with war crimes for its bombing campaign against civilian Belgrade. We have something to lose by shunning the court for its imperfections. First, the tribunal can still assert jurisdiction over Americans and allies, whether we ratify or not, so it is probably a good idea to do as we have done in The Hague, sending judges and prosecutors who will shape the institution to our higher standards. Second, it's not hard to imagine that we would find the court useful in our war on terrorism, when we get tired of processing all the bad guys ourselves. And third, if you will forgive a split second of idealism, it is a way to engage the world with something other than precision-guided munitions. The Bush administration is standing on principle. The price of that is, America will be standing on the sidelines. E-mail: billkeller@nytimes. com

President Bush is set to announce a voluntary plan to slow the growth in emissions of gases linked to global warming. President Bush is set to announce a plan today calling for voluntary measures to slow but not halt the growth in emissions of heat-trapping gases linked to global warming, White House officials said last night. The climate proposal is Mr. Bush's response to the Kyoto Protocol, the 1997 treaty accepted but not yet ratified by all other large industrialized countries, which would require cuts in such emissions by 2010 to well below their 1990 levels. Mr. Bush rejected the treaty last March, calling its targets arbitrary, its schedule too costly to meet and its terms, which are not easily applied in large developing countries, unfair. The program he is to announce this afternoon would slow the rate of growth in emissions in relation to the growth of the overall economy. It would use $4.6 billion in tax credits over the next five years to encourage companies and individuals to limit those emissions. Utilities, for example, would get incentives to build power-generating windmills; homeowners would get new tax credits for buying solar panels or more efficient cars. The one thing the climate policy would not do is require anything of anybody, sticking with the position Mr. Bush has held for more than a year on the climate issue: that firm limits on the so-called greenhouse gases would drag down the economy. The administration's approach, he plans to say, is based ''on the common-sense idea that sustainable economic growth is the key to environmental progress -- because it is growth that provides the resources for investment in clean technologies,'' according to an advance text. On another emissions issue unrelated to climate, aides said Mr. Bush would call today for mandatory restrictions on three other kinds of pollutants from power plants: mercury, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. In contrast to proposals by environmentalists and many Democrats, however, the plan would delay such cuts until 2010 or later. Last night, administration officials called the voluntary approach on climate the most reasonable path for the time being. A senior administration official did say, however, that if insufficient progress was being made by 2012, there could be a move toward some kind of limits. ''If we're not making progress toward our goal,'' he said, ''we will be considering a full range of programs.''Some environmental groups criticized this kind of checkup, saying it puts off any measuring of progress until well after Mr. Bush is out of office. Under the administration's proposed target, the growth rate of emissions of carbon dioxide would drop nearly 18 percent by 2012 -- to 151 metric tons for each $1 million in gross domestic product, from the current level of 183 metric tons. But environmental groups sharply criticized this kind of yardstick, saying that it merely reflects an existing trend toward using energy more efficiently and adding that as long as the economy grows, this would not result in emissions reductions. Alluding to the date of the speech, Jennifer Morgan, the climate policy director for the World Wildlife Fund, called it ''a valentine to the coal and oil industry that will allow emissions to increase without any time frame, eternally.''One provision of the new climate plan would be to greatly expand a program encouraging businesses to monitor and report their emissions of greenhouse gases. Those that participate, voluntarily, would gain credits that might eventually be used in a trading scheme similar to that used for other pollution. White House officials said this could prompt industries to change behavior, the same way similar reporting requirements instituted in the late 1980's resulted in big cuts in releases of toxic chemicals. Philip E. Clapp, president of the National Environmental Trust, a private lobbying group, criticized this approach, saying: ''The president's global warming proposal appears to be another faith-based initiative: we should have faith that major corporations will line up to volunteer cuts in their carbon pollution. That approach has failed for a decade now, since the president's father set up the first voluntary program.''And Myron Ebell, a climate policy expert at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a private group whose free-market views are frequently embraced by industry, criticized the idea from the opposite ideological direction.''What looks like voluntary will actually be coercive,'' Mr. Ebell said. The president is leaving for Asia on Saturday and has been under pressure to present a climate plan before visiting Japan. Japan, which has avoided criticizing the administration over its rejection of the treaty, has been eager for a sign that Mr. Bush is concerned about the issue. Several experts on the treaty said that his decision to make the announcement now was very likely influenced by this situation. The proposed plan on nongreenhouse emissions from power plants -- mercury, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen oxides -- would impose mandatory limits but would allow companies to exceed them by buying credits from others that reduce pollution below required levels. There would be no similar limits on power plants' emissions of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas. In the face of lobbying from coal companies and utilities, Mr. Bush abandoned a campaign pledge last March to control the four plant emissions together and has shown no signs of reconsidering that idea. As hints of the emerging plan circulated in e-mail messages by environmental groups and conservative groups, it appeared that no one was particularly pleased. An official at an energy company that had been pressing the White House to revise power plant rules said the best news was that there was something finally on the table to discuss.''At least they're coming out with something,'' the official said. ''It may not be what everyone wants, but it recognizes that the Senate is going to deal with climate on its power plant bill.''

The climate policy President Bush announced on Thursday sets out a better and far more workable approach for measuring progress against global warming than the one in the Kyoto framework he rejected last spring. The climate policy President Bush announced yesterday sets out a better and far more workable approach for measuring progress against global warming than the one in the Kyoto framework he rejected last spring. The president set the goal of an 18 percent reduction over the next 10 years in greenhouse gas intensity -- the ratio of emissions to economic activity -- rather than an arbitrary goal for curbs on total emissions. And he announced steps to get there. This emphasis not only removes a large part of the economic risk associated with goals based on a fixed emission limit, but gives American industries a target, similar to a goal for productivity or efficiency, that they can shoot for in practical ways. Because it is realistic and workable, it is likely to move us, at last, beyond arguments at the extremes and toward real action against climate change. For most of the past century, economic growth, energy use and emissions of carbon dioxide -- the dominant greenhouse gas -- have been linked. In this setting, a fixed emission limit harms the economy. Until we invent and commercialize new technologies to generate electricity and provide transportation -- as the president's science and technology initiatives encourage -- a fixed emission limit eventually means lowering economic growth. In fact, as Russia demonstrated in the past decade, the surest way to experience emissions declines is to go through an economic collapse. By tying goals to economic activity, the president's policy encourages a flexible response but does not take economic risks. The goal of his plan is both serious and meaningful: an 18 percent decline in greenhouse gas intensity over 10 years implies a 4.5 percent reduction by 2012 in annual greenhouse gas emissions, relative to what they would be if we moved ahead according to current forecasts. Meeting this goal will require real reductions: faster adoption of energy-saving technologies; improved recovery of methane that currently escapes from coal mines, gas pipelines and landfills; and programs to improve forestry and agriculture so they absorb more carbon dioxide. These are reasonable steps that require a level of effort the administration believes is warranted, given the current state of climate science. Yet many of these reductions are not easily encouraged in traditional ways. An economist's first choice for lowering industrial pollution is usually a cap-and-trade program. Companies are required to measure their emissions in tons and obtain an equal number of emission allowances, which can then be traded with other companies. This encourages the least expensive reductions. President Bush has proposed such a system to control sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and mercury emissions from power plants. But applying this concept to greenhouse gases would be premature and would risk unnecessarily high costs. The methane and carbon storage options that are among the most practical means now to reduce greenhouse gases cannot easily be measured for trading. Instead, the president has challenged businesses to figure out innovative ways to measure and record their reductions. And he has promised them that not only would their investments in emissions reductions today be protected from future policy decisions, but the credits generated by these investments could be traded. For too long, the loudest voices in the climate change debate have either called for large emission reductions in the next 10 years or ignored the fact that climate change is a real risk. President Bush's plan makes sense: focus on a reasonable approach to slow, stop and then reverse growth in greenhouse gas emissions; don't wreck the economy in the process; and adjust future policy in response to scientific and technical progress. He has added a fresh, reasoned voice to the debate. R. Glenn Hubbard is chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers.

Alert shoppers know that an extra word in a product's description can make a big difference, and rarely for the better. Apologies to connoisseurs of Velveeta, but most of us don't regard ''cheese food'' as a good substitute for plain ordinary cheese. To the unwary, yesterday's pledge by the Bush administration to reduce ''greenhouse gas intensity'' by 18 percent may have sounded like a pledge to reduce greenhouse gases, the emissions (mainly carbon dioxide, released by burning fossil fuels) that cause global warming. In fact, that's the way it was reported in some news articles. But the extra word makes all the difference. In fact, the administration proposed to achieve almost nothing; consistent with that goal, it also announced specific policies that are trivial in scope and will have virtually no effect. What is this thing called greenhouse gas intensity? It is the volume of greenhouse gas emissions divided by gross domestic product. The administration says that it will reduce this ratio by 18 percent over the next decade. But since most forecasts call for G.D.P. to expand 30 percent or more over the same period, this is actually a proposal to allow a substantial increase in emissions. Still, doesn't holding the growth of emissions to less than the growth of the economy show at least some effort to face up to climate change? No, because that would happen anyway. In fact, the administration's target for reduction in greenhouse gas intensity might well be achieved without any policy actions -- which is good news, because the administration hasn't really proposed any. The reasons greenhouse gas intensity tends to fall over time are complex, but the basic logic is simple: We are gradually becoming a post-industrial society, in which knowledge and service industries grow faster than the old smokestack sector. Because pushing bits around doesn't take as much energy as pushing around large pieces of sheet metal, a dollar of new-economy G.D.P. generally doesn't require burning as much carbon as a dollar of old-economy G.D.P.But the old economy is still there, and the new economy still uses significant amounts of energy -- especially if office workers drive S.U.V.'s long distances on their way from house to mouse and back. So as the economy grows, greenhouse gas intensity may fall, but greenhouse gas emissions -- which are what damages the planet -- continue to rise. So what does the Bush administration propose to do? Nothing much. The main actual policy described yesterday was an array of tax credits for planet-friendly activities, such as installing solar power or capturing methane from landfill. It's not worth trying to analyze the specifics of this proposal, such as why tax credits should be the tool of choice. (Oh, I forgot -- tax cuts are the answer to all problems.) The key point is that it's just too small to do the job. It offers $4.6 billion over the next five years. That's less than a penny a day per American. Do you really think that's enough to produce a major change in the way we use energy, or that it is an appropriate level of response to a major threat to the planet? And that's the substantive part of the proposal. The other part is creation of a ''registry'': companies can, if they choose, report their emissions of greenhouse gases. If they show reductions in emissions, they will receive -- well, nothing. But future administrations might be pleased. The real question is why an administration that clearly doesn't want to do anything about climate change feels obliged to put on this show. The answer, of course, is that on environmental issues the administration is clearly out of step with the public. Its indifference to the fate of the planet would be quite unpopular if it were generally appreciated. To deal with this potential political threat, the Bush administration exaggerates the economic costs of environmental regulations. Last spring Dick Cheney implied, disingenuously, that environmental rules had caused a shortage of refining capacity; now George W. Bush tells us, implausibly, that the Kyoto Protocol will destroy millions of jobs. Meanwhile the administration offers the illusion of environmentalism, by announcing policies that sound impressive but are nearly content-free. So buyers beware. What the administration offered yesterday was processed climate-change policy food, bearing very little resemblance to the real thing. E-mail: krugman@nytimes. com

President Bush announced his long-awaited plans today for slowing the buildup of gases linked to climate change and for cutting power plant pollution. His speech, made this afternoon at a government climate and oceans research center here, elicited clashing choruses of criticism and praise from advocates and politicians arguing over the best way to cut emissions of so-called greenhouse gases while minimizing the burden on the economy. Mr. Bush made it clear that, for him, the economy came first, not just for its own sake but because, he said, a thriving economy was necessary to build wealth that could be used to improve conditions on the planet.''My approach recognizes that economic growth is the solution, not the  problem,'' he said. With his address, Mr. Bush essentially provided his answer to an international treaty intended to lower emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases that his administration rejected in March. At that time, he also abandoned a campaign pledge to cut power-plant emissions of carbon dioxide and three other pollutants. Not until now has his cabinet been able to agree on substitute proposals. The treaty Mr. Bush rejected, the Kyoto Protocol, has been agreed to but not yet ratified by almost every other industrial power and developing country. It would require prompt and mandatory reductions by 2012 in gas emissions to levels well below those in 1990. Mr. Bush rejected the treaty saying it would burden the American economy and unfairly exempt major developing countries. The plan Mr. Bush announced today would rely on voluntary measures only and allow gas emissions to continue to rise, with the goal of slowing the rate of growth. Utilities and energy companies expressed support for Mr. Bush's plans  through their trade groups. Environmental campaigners expressed dismay, including some Greenpeace demonstrators who stood outside the Commerce Department building waving wads of fake dollar bills and a mock climateaction plan stamped in red with the words ''Exxon-Mobil Approved.''On the climate, the administration wants to stick with inducements instead of requirements, using tax breaks and the prospect of a future trade in emissions credits to encourage industry and individuals to trim releases of the warming gases. But in trying to minimize the costs, his critics said, Mr. Bush had settled on a strategy that would provide few results, saying that some limits on emissions would inevitably be necessary. By 2012, Mr. Bush said, his goal would be to nudge the curve of emissions down enough to save 500 million metric tons of carbon dioxide -- the equivalent ''of taking 70 million cars off the road.''Mr. Bush said he planned to promote this measured, voluntary means of dealing with climate change in visits to China, South Korea and Japan next week, saying that it was important to find a way to  encourage developing countries to join rich ones in reducing the growth of the so-called greenhouse gases. Japan has strongly supported the Kyoto treaty, which was negotiated there in 1997. But Japanese officials have been eager for some sign of action in the United States before pursuing its ratification. Mr. Bush said China, India and other large countries with fast-growing economies were already the dominant source of warming gases.  ''It would be irresponsible to absolve them from shouldering some of the shared obligations,'' he said. The United States remains the single largest producer of greenhouse emissions, generating about 20 percent of the global total. Another central element of his climate plan would be to expand a system created under his father's administration in which businesses would voluntarily report their emissions and be granted credits that could later prove valuable if an emissions trading system were adopted. He only hinted at that prospect, though, saying that only after 2012 would there be an assessment of how the country was doing without concrete caps. On cleaning up power plants, though, Mr. Bush said a voluntary system would not do. In Bush's view power plant pollution poses a clear health risk, while the threat of global warming remains less certain. Echoing recent bipartisan proposals in Congress, he called for deep mandatory reductions in three kinds of pollutants from power plants -- sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and mercury -- all of which contribute to health problems and harm the environment, but play no significant role in global warming. Proposing legislation that he has called ''a new Clean Air Act for the 21st Century,'' Mr. Bush said that sulfur dioxide would drop 73 percent by 2018, nitrogen oxides, which spawn smog, would drop by 67 percent over the same span, and mercury by 69 percent. He proposed a fundamental redesign of existing plant regulations, ending a jumble of individual restrictions on various compounds. As with other proposals evolving in Congress, his plan would allow industries to achieve reductions by trading emissions credits. Environmental groups and Democrats, including Al Gore, pounced on Mr. Bush's plans, saying they followed industry's dictates and would result in little or no improvement beyond existing laws and trends. David Hawkins, the climate policy director for the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private group, said the plans for climate and power plants mirrored the views of the Energy Department and companies that sell or use large amounts of coal, oil, and other fossil fuels -- the main source of carbon dioxide.''Every number, every date, are the numbers and dates that they advocated,'' he said. But others involved in the debate were more content. Kevin J. Fay, the executive director of the International Climate Change Partnership, which represents multinational manufacturers who support some climate controls, said Mr. Bush's proposal was a starting point for moving ahead with legislation and new environmental rules. ''The most significant thing is that they now have entered the dialogue with a fairly well-rounded proposal,'' he said.

Saying that any action taken to reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases was at least a step in the right direction, the European Union gave a tepid welcome today to President Bush's new proposals to tackle climate change. The Bush proposals, which are strictly voluntary, would rely on tax credits to coax big business to pollute less. As word of the proposals began to filter out, many environmentalists and political commentators in Europe said that Mr. Bush's plan was far too little, too late, and would not improve his image abroad as a servant of the oil industry. The most outspoken reaction came from France, where the head of an intergovernmental task force on global warming calling the proposals ''window dressing.''The expert, Philippe Meunier, said that although it was hard to judge the new plan before knowing its details, ''the total volunteerism approach makes us worry.''''It lacks credibility,'' Mr. Meunier added. ''We worry that without sanctions it just won't work.''He asserted that while the plan was a step in the right direction, it showed that the United States sought change ''at no cost and in a way that would not in any way challenge the American lifestyle and especially its consumption.''Echoing the concerns of most other specialists reacting today, Mr. Meunier evoked the Kyoto Protocol, the widely accepted treaty that would require emissions cuts by 2010 to well below their 1990 levels. The Bush plan might ''destabilize'' support for the Kyoto pact, which is awaiting ratification. As Mr. Meunier put it, ''You may have countries that say, why should we who are poorer do anything?''The Bush administration's rejection of the protocol last March caused an outcry in Europe and came to be seen here as another example of America's refusal to limit its options in almost any sphere. When he rejected the treaty, Mr. Bush called its targets arbitrary, its schedule too costly to meet and its terms unfair. Nonetheless, no other country has chosen to abandon it. The voluntary measures in the plan Mr. Bush unveiled today would, if followed, slow but not halt the growth in emissions of heat-trapping gases linked to global warming. It would use $4.6 billion in tax credits over the next five years to encourage companies and individuals to limit those emissions. In Brussels, a European Commission spokeswoman, Pia Ahrenkilde-Hansen, said, ''We feel that the multilateral approach is the best way to face up to this tremendous challenge.'' She said that the European Union still hoped the United States would return to the Kyoto pact. In Britain, Chris Hewett of the Institute for Public Policy Research, added his voice to criticism of the plan as not enough. He said Britain had proved ''that you can cut emissions and still have a healthy economy,'' adding that there was no ''inextricable link'' between carbon dioxide emissions and economic growth. Some green groups said they were suspicious of the timing of the White House announcement, just days before Mr. Bush is scheduled to meet with Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi in Japan. Japan has so far remained committed to the Kyoto pact, but it has made no secret of the fact that it will have difficulty meeting its targets. Hiroshi Oki, the new Japanese environment minister, said it would be best for the United States to return to the the protocol. But, he said that ''our joint efforts'' must not be halted by disagreement on that point. The only real praise for the Bush administration had nothing to do with the environmental proposal. In Germany, Hans-Joachim Schellnhuber, director of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research and a member of the government's advisory council, made a point of citing a second American plan announced today, one that affects emissions but not global warming. He hailed Mr. Bush's call for mandatory restrictions on three power plant pollutants -- mercury, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides -- as ''a great air pollution policy.''''A wonderful policy,'' Mr. Schellnhuber added. ''But the wrong target.''

The obvious conclusion to be drawn from President Bush's latest global warming strategy, unveiled this week, is that he does not regard warming as a problem. The obvious conclusion to be drawn from President Bush's latest global warming strategy, unveiled this week, is that he does not regard warming as a problem. There seems no other way to interpret a policy that would actually increase the gases responsible for heating the earth's atmosphere. That the policy demands little from the American people, while insulting allies who have agreed to take tough steps to deal with the problem, only adds to one's sense of dismay. The White House described Mr. Bush's strategy as aggressive and bold. The only thing bold about it are accounting tactics worthy of Enron that are designed to make an increase in emissions look like a decrease. The plan is voluntary and consists mainly of tax credits and other incentives to encourage Americans to limit emissions. There is nothing wrong with voluntary measures or with the credits. Several American companies have already reduced emissions on their own, partly for environmental reasons and partly because the efficiencies required to achieve reductions make economic sense. But these piecemeal efforts have been undertaken largely in the expectation that at some point the United States would join in a collective attack on the buildup of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, which mainstream scientists now agree could trigger unwelcome changes in the earth's climate. Mr. Bush has refused to join that effort, abandoning his campaign pledge to limit carbon emissions and renouncing the 1997 Kyoto Protocol committing industrialized nations to mandatory reductions of carbon and other greenhouse gases. Mr. Bush's long-awaited substitute for Kyoto is a disappointment. The essence of his strategy is a concept that seems to have been minted for the occasion, called ''emissions intensity,'' under which carbon dioxide pollution would be allowed to grow, but at a slower rate than economic output. That sounds attractive, but it misses the point. The buildup of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, already alarmingly high, is a cumulative process. Thus the name of the game is to stop adding new emissions to the vast amounts already up there, not simply to slow their growth. Yet that is all Mr. Bush is proposing to do, meanwhile dressing up his meager agenda with some squirrely math. He first posits an increase in emissions that is higher and more rapid than the forecasts of his own Energy Department. Then, from this ''business-as-usual'' baseline, he promises reductions of 18 percent in the next 10 years. By his own figures, however, actual emissions -- the ones that count -- could rise by 14 percent, which is exactly the rate at which they have been rising for the last 10 years. Mr. Bush's speech also included proposals aimed at reducing three other pollutants largely unrelated to global warming: mercury, sulfur dioxide -- the main cause of acid rain -- and nitrogen oxides, which contribute to urban smog. The president called for stronger, mandatory caps on all three pollutants and for market-based mechanisms like emissions trading to help companies meet those targets. Mr. Bush would substitute this ''cap and trade'' approach for the complex system of regulations that now govern clean air enforcement. In principle, these are fine ideas. But before disposing of the existing regulatory structure, Congress must be fully satisfied that the president's proposals will in fact achieve the sizable reductions he and his senior associates say they will. We cannot abandon existing law for a promise. Meanwhile, Congress is obliged to do something, and soon, to develop a credible national strategy on global warming. On this score Mr. Bush has fallen well short of the mark.

As a new and glaring rift emerges between the White House and America's allies over how to pursue the next phase of the war on terrorism, something odd has happened: President Bush and his top aides now seem to welcome, even to egg on, the sharp differences prompted by Mr. Bush's determination to expand his battle against what he calls ''evil'' regimes. In private, his friends and closest aides report, Mr. Bush fumes about weak-kneed ''European elites'' and scared Arab leaders who, in his view, lack the courage to stand up to states that may one day provide terrorists with nuclear or biological weapons. Today Mr. Bush departed for Asia saying that the goal of his trip was to strengthen his antiterrorism coalition. But it was telling that even before Air Force One departed, the South Korean press was filled with denunciations of his inclusion of North Korea as part of the ''axis of evil,'' protesting that Mr. Bush was undercutting years of diplomacy aimed at luring the Stalinist North out of its frightfully armed shell with economic incentives. In China, where Mr. Bush is making a delayed state visit, the country's leadership has warned in the past few weeks of ''serious consequences'' if the president takes military action against Iraq. Beijing has voiced worries about a re-emergence of American unilateralism, which it thought had faded in the months after the Sept. 11 attacks. But in the last two weeks, Mr. Bush's strident tone has suggested just the opposite. In appearances across the country, he has built on the ''axis of evil'' phraseology of his State of the Union address, knowing full well that each repetition irritates and divides the countries he once hailed as his great coalition partners. His national security aides -- usually more attuned to how Mr. Bush's words play Poland or Peru than Peoria -- have begun to cite evidence that Americans are behind the broader mission of rooting out rogue states seeking weapons of mass destruction, even if the allies are not. They compare Mr. Bush's mission to Ronald Reagan's single-minded goal of ridding the world of Communism. They describe their boss as a man who emerged from the first phase of the war more convinced than ever that the United States alone has the power to complete its task, with the coalition if possible -- and without them if necessary. It is an America-first position that Vice President Dick Cheney voiced with particular clarity on Friday to the Council on Foreign Relations.''America has friends and allies in this cause, but only we can lead it,'' he said in a ballroom filled with many of his old friends and former colleagues. ''Only we can rally the world in a task of this complexity against an enemy so elusive and so resourceful. The United States and only the United States can see this effort through to victory.''When America's allies have begged to differ in recent days, they have found themselves engaged in open, public bickering with even with the most diplomatic members of Mr. Bush's war council. It started when France's foreign minister, Hubert Vdrine, dismissed Mr. Bush's approach to Iran, Iraq and North Korea as ''simplistic,'' and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell shot back that his French colleague was ''getting the vapors.''Then, all this week, there has been a far more telling war of words between Mr. Powell and Christopher Patten, the European Union's foreign affairs minister. Until a few days ago, he was a favorite of Washington conservatives for the tough line he took against China while serving as Britain's last governor general to Hong Kong. When Mr. Patten started off the tiff by accusing Mr. Bush of taking an ''absolutist'' approach to the world, Mr. Powell shot back that his old friend deeply misunderstood and said, ''I shall have a word with him, as they say in Britain.''Before he had a chance, Mr. Patten published a lengthy rebuke of the administration in The Financial Times, saying that American success in Afghanistan had ''reinforced some dangerous instincts,'' including the belief that ''the projection of military power is the only basis of true security,'' that ''the U.S. can rely only on itself,'' and that allies were ''an optional extra.''He is hardly alone in that view. The German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, said this week that the Bush administration was treating coalition partners like ''satellites,'' a term clearly meant as a comparison to the old Soviet Union and its Eastern Bloc. And then President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, Mr. Bush's newest strategic partner, weighed in with the observation that the members of the antiterror coalition signed up to battle the Taliban and Al Qaeda, and ''Iraq is not on this list.''Even Canada -- America's closest allies save for Britain -- warned that any effort by the United States to act unilaterally in the next phase of the war ''will go nowhere.''What makes these exchanges particularly notable, apart from their bluntness, is the shift they reflect in foreign views of Mr. Bush -- and Mr. Bush's evolving views of his allies. For the first nine months of his presidency, whenever Mr. Bush was tempted to act on his own -- dumping the Kyoto Protocol on global warming with barely a warning to Japan or Europe, for example -- he usually followed up with an intensive round of fence-mending. By this summer, he was moderating his language, paying off America's dues to the United Nations and talking about the future of new partnerships. Then came Sept. 11 and a new spirit of alliance. European and Asian leaders said they thought they were seeing a George W. Bush emerge. This was a president who invited foreign leaders to the Oval Office for long conversations, who dialed around the globe the way his father once had, whose go-it-alone tendencies were being sanded down by the realities of operating in a complex world that provided many physical and financial havens for terrorists. Now, they fear, the old Mr. Bush may be re-emerging. The change in view began with his decision to withdraw from the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, but since Russia seemed to react mildly, so did Europe. It accelerated when he declared that Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters were not ''prisoners of war.'' Then came the ''axis of evil,'' a phrase that European and Asian allies alike said dangerously lumped together three countries that pose very different challenges. What bothers the Europeans the most is not entirely clear: Mr. Bush's goals, his missionary zeal, or the thought that Washington sees its role as wiping out bad governments and the allies' role as one of cleaning up with aid and peacekeepers. Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage has little patience for that kind of hand-wringing. ''It's very hard to attack something like 'axis of evil,' '' he said, ''because Mr. Bush was not talking about people, but about regimes.''At the core of the debate lies a deeper question about American foreign policy that now bedevils Mr. Bush and his aides: is America stronger when it acts in an unfettered manner and defends its national interests directly, or when it acts with allies whose interests may frustrate Washington's goals? A NATION CHALLENGED: WHITE HOUSE MEMO

The Enron Corporation quietly drew up a plan to cultivate close political ties to Vice President Al Gore during the 2000 presidential race and tried to build relationships with his inner circle even though the company was one of the biggest campaign contributors to George W. Bush and the Republicans. The double-sided strategy was intended to ensure that Enron, the Houston-based energy company that has filed for bankruptcy protection, wielded influence with the next president, whoever he was, according to internal company documents and interviews with officials at Enron and from the Gore campaign. In May 2000, shortly after Mr. Gore was assured of the Democratic nomination, Enron hired Sally A. Painter, a public relations executive, who drafted a ''six-month action plan for Enron'' for ''Democratic political outreach in the 2000 presidential election,'' the documents show. Ms. Painter identified influential advisers at the Gore headquarters in Nashville and in Washington whom she said Enron officials should get to know. Her plan called for writing briefs for Mr. Gore's staff on issues important to Enron and for Enron to play an ''active and visible role'' at the Democratic National Convention.  She also suggested that Enron ''actively participate in campaign activities on the ground in a key swing state.'' If Mr. Gore was elected, she said, Enron should ''participate in senior team for inaugural planning.''In the summer of 2000, Enron hired one of Mr. Gore's old friends and a longtime financial supporter, Charles W. Bone. Mr. Bone, with contacts in Washington and at the Tennessee Valley Authority, helped Enron settle a bitter contractual dispute with the T.V.A. The suit was settled in January 2001 for more than $200 million. The authority, not Enron, disclosed the settlement. Former Enron officials said an important part of their strategy to win favor with the Gore campaign was a significant increase in the company's donations to Democrats. Enron documents outlined this approach; they show that in 1999 and 2000 the company gave $426,500 in so-called soft-money donations to Republicans and $362,000 to Democrats. That amounts to 54 percent to Republicans and 46 percent to Democrats. In 1997 and 1998, Enron's donations had tilted much more to Republicans -- 67 percent, with Democrats getting only 33 percent. But Enron continued to give much more to Governor Bush than to Vice President Gore. In all, it gave Mr. Gore's campaign $13,750 and Mr. Bush's $113,800, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Enron also gave $250,000 to the host committee for the Republican National Convention, and in 1999 and 2000, Kenneth L. Lay, then Enron's  chairman, gave $250,000 in what the documents described as ''personal money to the R.N.C.,'' the Republican National Committee. The documents and interviews with officials at Enron and with the Gore campaign illuminate the Enron executives' determination to cultivate bipartisan relationships at the highest levels of politics. In what one Enron official recalled as a desire to ''have Enron's message become part of the energy and telecom policy of the Gore campaign,'' Enron organized a dinner in the private Nest Lounge of the Willard Hotel, two blocks from the White House, that included top Gore and Enron officials as well as executives in the high-tech industry. Asked why he thought he was hired by Enron, Mr. Bone joked, ''It's because of my brilliant skills and great personality.'' But he acknowledged that he and Mr. Gore ''go way back to his first campaign in '76.'' Mr. Bone also said: ''You never know a lot of times why people call to ask for your help. But all corporations try to make some effort to know the people on both sides of the aisle. It's just about relationships.''After the election, Mr. Bone said, he also helped arrange a dinner meeting of Richard S. Shapiro, Enron's top lobbyist, and Linda Breathitt, a Kentucky Democrat who is a member of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Ms. Breathitt held a crucial swing vote on the commission, and the dinner, last March at Equinox, a restaurant near the White House, came as Enron was trying to exert influence over the appointment of new commissioners. Enron officials were pressing for changes in how the electric utility industry was structured. Mr. Bone said ''the dinner was to introduce some of the Enron people'' to Ms. Breathitt and was not unusual.  Ms. Breathitt said in an interview that Enron was probably trying to gain influence with the commission. ''They were an aggressive company,'' she said. ''But it was appropriate. I did not know Mr. Shapiro, and Mr. Bone asked me if I would meet with Mr. Shapiro to get to know him better and hear his views on a number of energy issues. I paid for my meal. There was nothing to hide.''The architect of Enron's outreach to Democrats was Mr. Shapiro, Enron's managing director and senior vice president for government affairs. Through a spokeswoman, he declined to comment for this article. There is no evidence that officials at Enron or in the Gore campaign acted improperly. Gore officials said they were happy to meet with Enron executives, given the company's importance and size. Some said they did not know if Enron followed through on all the plans in Ms. Painter's memorandum for the 2000 campaign. Among those named in that document as having Mr. Gore's ear were Peter Knight, a longtime Gore confidant; Charles Burson, Mr. Gore's chief of staff in the White House; Jim Kohlenberger and Elaine Kamarck, top policy advisers; and Carter Eskew and Michael Whouley, senior strategists. Christopher M. Long, who was a lobbyist for Enron, suggested in an internal memorandum that the company draft issue briefs for Mr. Gore on ''four policy areas on which Enron has unique experience: electricity deregulation, e-commerce (trading), energy services and broadband.''Mr. Whouley said he had not thought twice about speaking at the Enron-sponsored dinner at the Willard on June 13, 2000.''They wanted to get to know people and they wanted an update on the campaign,'' Mr. Whouley said. ''I can't speculate on what their motives were, except the usual Washington meet-and-greet.''At the dinner, attended by about 20 people, Mr. Whouley and Mr. Kohlenberger were introduced by Mr. Shapiro. They gave presentations about the campaign and took questions. Enron painstakingly prepared for the dinner. Ms. Painter wrote a document of ''potential questions to consider for the dinner discussion'' for the Gore officials, including ''How can the vice president and the Democratic Party strengthen its business message?'' and ''What has been your reaction to the vice president's leadership strategies?'' People at the dinner said the discussion roughly followed the questions outlined. One participant, Robert H. Rosen, chief executive of Healthy Companies International, said he had not expected Enron to put on a dinner for Democrats. ''When I first walked in I was surprised and a little confused because I always thought Enron was more of a Republican backed company,'' he said. He said he expressed his surprise to Mr. Shapiro. ''He told me he was a Gore supporter,'' Mr. Rosen recalled, ''but that his boss, Ken Lay, was for Bush.''Even so, Mr. Lay was no stranger to Mr. Gore or to President Bill Clinton. At a meeting at the White House in 1997, for example, Mr. Lay pressed Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore to support a market-based approach to global warming. Enron was one of the most visible corporate backers of the Kyoto Protocol, which the Bush administration has rejected, because Enron wanted to participate in the market for buying and selling emissions permits for the greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming. As Ms. Painter was planning more public interaction between Enron and Gore officials, Enron officials said, Mr. Shapiro worked behind the scenes to hire people close to Mr. Gore. In the summer of 2000, they said, Mr. Shapiro wanted to hire Johnny Hayes, one of Mr. Gore's closest friends and top fund-raisers in Nashville. But Mr. Shapiro could not hire Mr. Hayes because he was already on the Gore campaign's payroll. After the campaign, Enron hired Mr. Hayes as a lobbyist. Meanwhile, Enron hired Mr. Bone, a Nashville lawyer close to Mr. Hayes and Mr. Gore. Mr. Bone said he set up a meeting in the fall of 2000 between Mr. Lay and Craven Crowell, then chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority. That led to the settlement of the lawsuit the authority had filed against Enron,  asserting that Enron had violated its contract to supply adequate power to the utility in 1998 and 1999.''They engaged me to see if we could settle the lawsuit that they were in with the T.V.A.,'' Mr. Bone said. ''I think it worked out to everybody's satisfaction.''

President Bush said again today that ''all options'' are open in dealing with Iraq, and also strongly affirmed American support for the ailing economy of Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of Japan. At a joint news conference this afternoon, the first day of a six-day diplomatic trip, Mr. Bush said that ''I will keep all options on the table'' regarding Iraq and ''there is nothing else to talk about.''Of Mr. Koizumi, Mr. Bush said:  ''I'm confident in this man's leadership ability, I'm confident in his strategy and I'm confident in his ability to carry ot that strategy.''  Although the positions of the two leaders appeared close on the need to reform Japan's economy, and on their ability to work together in the campaign against terrorism, they differed on their approaches to North Korea, which Mr. Bush has called an ''axis of evil.''Mr. Bush described North Korea as the creator of starvation and said South Korea was the home of freedom, but Mr. Koizumi was more conciliatory. The priminister said his nation, ''through cooperation and coordination with the U.S. and South Korea, would like to work on normalizing our relationship with North Korea.''Earlier today, at the start of a one-on-one meeting, Mr. Bush called Mr. Koizumi ''a great reformer,'' but the president was expected to urge the prime minister in private to make urgent reforms in a Japanese economy that is verging on crisis. The president is at the start of a  trip to Japan, South Korea and China, with its mission made more difficult by Mr. Bush's tough talk in the United States of Iraq, Iran and North Korea as part of an ''axis of evil.''Mr. Bush's remark has set off alarms, particularly among the South Koreans, who are worried that it could lead to further tensions or war with the North, but also among the European allies. Asked about the European reaction before the start of the meeting with Mr. Koizumi, Mr. Bush replied, ''They understand our point.''Concerns over the Japanese economy were expected to take up much of the discussions between the two leaders. In an interview with Asian journalists in Washington on Friday that was released Saturday by the White House, Mr. Bush said that while Mr. Koizumi had ''done everything he said he would do,'' the Japanese economy needed ''significant reforms and restructuring, as well as a focus on its loan portfolios.'' Mr. Bush added that ''the Japanese economy must restructure, and must deal with her loans, her bad loans.''Some Japanese government officials said over the weekend that they were taken aback by the bluntness of Mr. Bush's remarks. Mr. Bush's trip comes almost exactly a decade after his father made a calamitous visit to Tokyo, when the former president collapsed from an intestinal flu in the lap of the prime minister during a formal banquet. At the time, the economic health of the two nations was reversed, with the United States in recession and Japan still enjoying the boom times of its old ''bubble'' economy. Mr. Bush and Mr. Koizumi were also to discuss global warming.  While the Japanese have politely praised Mr. Bush's recent plan to control greenhouse gases as evidence that America is committed to the issue, they have also made clear their hope that the United States will return to a treaty, negotiated in Kyoto, with other industrialized nations. A group of about 50 Japanese and American demonstrators protested Mr. Bush's environmental policies near the American Embassy in Tokyo on Sunday, shortly before Mr. Bush arrived. This morning, a robust-looking Mr. Bush said that he felt ''great'' as he began his day with a trip to Meiji Jingu, a Shinto shrine. He and Laura Bush, who held hands, were accompanied by a chief priest of the shrine, dressed in full-length cream-colored silk. Mr. Bush spent about 10 minutes inside the shrine, then signed a guest book. From there he left for a display of yabusame, or archery from horses, an ancient Japanese religious practice. In a large field near the shrine, Mr. Bush sat next to Mr. Koizumi and watched as horsemen rode by at a breakneck gallop and shot arrows into a small clay target. ''Oh, yeah!'' the president said when one horseman hit the target.

The White House statement on climate change read: ''President Bush announced today that the United States has agreed with other industrialized nations that stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions should be achieved as soon as possible. The United States also agreed that it is timely to investigate quantitative targets to limit or reduce carbon dioxide emissions.''That was Nov. 7, 1989, one year after a global heat wave made the environment a top political issue and raised the prospect that people might be affecting the climate by adding carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases to the air, warming the planet as if it were inside a greenhouse. Twelve years later, under a new President Bush, the urgency has evaporated. On Feb. 14 the president articulated a new approach to what has become a lingering, complicated, politically charged scientific issue. It relies on voluntary efforts to slow, but not halt, the growth in emissions of greenhouse gases. Progress is to be measured by tracking the growth of emissions relative to the growth of the economy. For nearly a year, the president has been saying there is no scientific justification for the specific emissions targets set forth in the Kyoto Protocol, the climate treaty that would require participating industrialized countries to cut emissions by 2012 below their level of 1990. The administration says that when it comes to carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas, no one has yet determined how much is too much. But after analyzing details of Mr. Bush's new plan, many scientists and economists who study climate data and policy say the scientific ambiguity that the administration used to justify a limited response certainly exists, but cuts both ways.''What people sometimes forget is that the uncertainty in the science is double-edged,'' said Dr. Ronald G. Prinn, the director of the department of earth, atmospheric and planetary sciences at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.''In our own studies, we estimate about a chance in 20 that the warming in the next 100 years will exceed eight degrees Fahrenheit,'' he said. ''There's no doubt in my mind that eight degrees is something to deeply worry about. The target set by the president's policy to me looks inadequate in the face of that risk.''Under the administration's plan, carbon dioxide emissions would rise about 14 percent over the next decade -- the same increase that took place over the last decade. ''Can't we do maybe twice what we did in the last 10 years?'' Dr. Prinn asked, suggesting that the White House should move more aggressively against emissions. ''Then you'd have much more of a chance of real reductions.''Moreover, many climate experts said, rising productivity and energy efficiency have been slowing the growth of emissions compared with economic growth for more than a decade -- at the same pace Mr. Bush is proposing. Simply continuing this course, many said, is inadequate to promote the changes needed to flatten the curve of growth -- and eventually turn it downward. The debate over the new plan should reach Capitol Hill this week, when the Senate is expected to consider an energy bill with contentious provisions on oil drilling, gas-mileage standards and other policies that may affect emissions rates. Critics of the Bush approach include several members of a scientific committee assembled last year at the behest of the White House by the National Academy of Sciences to assess questions about climate change. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone, chairman of the academy panel and chancellor of the University of California at Irvine, said the Bush administration was mistaken to view uncertainty as a cause for comfort. He said there was no longer any ambiguity about whether humans were significant contributors to global warming, and he noted that in the opening line of its report to the White House, the panel stated plainly that ''greenhouse gases are accumulating in Earth's atmosphere as a result of human activities, causing surface air temperatures and subsurface ocean temperatures to rise.''Last week, Dr. Cicerone said continued growth in emissions would make things worse. ''This situation is not sustainable, and its trajectory is toward dangers,'' he said, adding that the White House proposal ''lacks ambition and foresight'' and ''sets goals that are too timid.''The goals were far from modest when Mr. Bush's father signed the first climate treaty, in 1992. Under that treaty, industrialized nations agreed to strive to reduce their greenhouse emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000. Instead, however, global emissions continued to rise. American releases of greenhouse gases rose more than 12 percent in that period. Last fall, most industrialized nations rallied around a new treaty, the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, though they have yet to ratify it. That treaty, which the Clinton administration had signed, would require participating industrialized countries to cut emissions by 2012 below where they stood in 1990. Mr. Bush rejected the Kyoto treaty last year, saying the emissions targets were not scientifically justified. He said that the treaty unfairly required no emissions cuts of fast-growing countries like China and that it would harm the American economy. Last week, Dr. Conrad C. Lautenbacher Jr., a mathematician and retired Navy vice admiral, who is the under secretary of commerce for oceans and atmosphere, said Mr. Bush's new plan struck a reasonable balance between economic and environmental concerns. ''You're playing with a $12 trillion economy here,'' Dr. Lautenbacher said. ''There's such a large connection with our economy based on what we do and to what degree we do it that we'd be foolish not to try to understand the basic processes better.''The new policy is also attracting support from scientists who are skeptical that global warming is a serious long-term threat. More aggressive moves, they say, would harm the economy and waste resources that could be used to solve other problems. Indeed, some skeptics say Mr. Bush's policy concedes too much by even acknowledging that voluntary changes are needed.''Voluntary has a nasty habit of turning mandatory,'' said S. Fred Singer, a climatologist, who has long criticized the consensus view on warming and who heads the Science and Environmental Policy Project, a research and advocacy group financed by private contributions. Dr. Singer says recent studies have steadily whittled away at the direst predictions for warming.''Every bit of data,'' he said, ''seems to confirm that the climate sensitivity is well below even the lowest value given'' by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an international scientific group that has issued three assessments of climate science over the last 10 years. But the lead author of one of the new studies, Dr. James E. Hansen, the director of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies, says there is a difference between refining projections of change and saying global warming is not a serious problem. In a paper in a recent issue of The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Dr. Hansen and a Goddard colleague, Dr. Makiko Sato, plotted the changing concentrations of various greenhouse gases and predicted that the average global temperature would rise 1.3 degrees over the next 50 years. That is at the low end of predictions for warming generated by most computer models of climate, but more than temperatures rose over the last 100 years. The paper concluded that the warming trend was likely to be substantially slower than previously thought, given the slowing buildup of greenhouse gases other than carbon dioxide. For example, Dr. Hansen said, methane, a potent greenhouse gas that was once rapidly building in the atmosphere, has shown a sharp decline in its growth rate since 1980, for reasons scientists cannot explain. The scientists also calculated that a concerted effort to raise fuel efficiency and find ways to remove carbon dioxide from the air could well cause emissions to stop growing altogether later in the century and, eventually, to decline. But over all, Dr. Hansen said, the Goddard analysis still means that temperatures by 2050 will be more than two degrees warmer than they were at the beginning of the 20th century, when the accelerating Industrial Revolution began transforming vast stores of coal and oil into carbon dioxide.''I could see keeping the warming relatively moderate, but I point out that even a two-degree warming is going to make the earth very warm compared to the history of the last millions of years,'' Dr. Hansen said. And, he noted, if emissions continue to rise just 1 percent a year -- the current rate, and the rate that would result under the policies proposed by Mr. Bush -- that adds up to a lot of greenhouse gases by later in the century. Still, Dr. Hansen said he remained optimistic that societies would rise to the challenge, adding that natural evidence of a strong human contribution to global warming was likely to pile up in the next few years -- along with a consensus for more action to counter it.''We'll be seeing how things are going well before 10 years are out,'' Dr. Hansen said.

The European Union's 15 environment ministers agreed that their countries would be bound by the Kyoto Protocol, the treaty that seeks to cut the pollution blamed for global warming. Formal ratification of the pact -- which commits the union to reduce emissions of ''greenhouse gases'' by 8 percent of 1990 levels during the five-year period from 2008 through 2012 -- now goes to the European Council of heads of state and government, which could act as early as this month at the union summit in Barcelona. Suzanne Daley (NYT)

President Bush imposed tariffs on most types of steel imported into the United States from Europe, Asia and South America. President Bush took some of the broadest federal action in two decades to protect a major American industry today, imposing tariffs of up to 30 percent on most types of steel imported into the United States from Europe, Asia and South America. The tariffs will last three years, he said, to give American steel producers time to consolidate operations and stem layoffs. Mr. Bush's action is likely to send the price of steel up sharply, perhaps as much as 10 percent, a cost American consumers will ultimately bear in higher prices for autos, appliances and housing. The United States imports about a quarter of the steel it consumes, though Mr. Bush exempted steel made in Mexico, Canada and developing nations from the tariffs announced today. The nations hardest hit are Japan, South Korea, China, Taiwan, Germany and Brazil. Within minutes of the White House announcement, America's European allies and Japan said they would almost certainly challenge the action before the World Trade Organization, setting the stage for a major trade fight with many of the same countries Mr. Bush is trying to hold together in the fractious coalition against terrorism. Their legal case, which could take years to litigate in Geneva, is likely to hinge on the fact that the ''import surge'' Mr. Bush declared as the justification for his action ended in 1998. Since then, foreign imports of steel to the United States have declined 27.5 percent, but the price of steel has also fallen sharply because of the simultaneous recessions in the United States and Japan, and a slowdown in Europe. Mr. Bush defended his move in an appearance tonight with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt. ''We're a free-trading nation, and in order to remain a free-trading nation, we must enforce law,'' he said. ''And that's exactly what I did. I decided that imports were severely affecting our industry, an important industry, in a negative impact, and, therefore, provide temporary relief so that the industry could restructure itself.'' [News analysis, Page C1. ]But as indicated by the heated debates that have taken place inside the White House, the decision was hardly as easy as Mr. Bush made it sound today. There were strategic considerations: Mr. Bush's national security aides are concerned that relations with Europe and Asia have already been strained by Mr. Bush's rejection of the Kyoto protocol on global warming; his withdrawal from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with Russia; and his description of Iraq, Iran and North Korea as an ''axis of evil.'' But in the end he decided that further damage to those ties was outweighed by the scope of the crisis in the steel industry. Mr. Bush's aides said the president hoped to create ''breathing space'' for the industry to overhaul itself, and to force Europe and Asia to shut down excess producing capacity rather than putting the brunt of the plant closings on the United States. Critics of the approach said, however, that the industry had resisted change for decades and they doubted that these tariffs would raise prices enough for the sickest firms to stave off bankruptcy. The White House plan takes no action on a bailout of up to $12 billion to cover pension and health care costs for retired workers from bankrupt companies, an issue that now moves to Congress. The Emergency Committee for American Trade, a group representing companies that buy steel, warned this afternoon that Mr. Bush had done more harm than good to the American economy.''A 30 percent tariff won't solve the integrated steel industry's problems, but it will force other American manufacturers to move steel-intensive production overseas, close U.S. plants, and outsource U.S. parts and components in order to compete,'' it said in a statement. But the steel industry and unions representing steel workers, who had called for even higher tariffs, said they were largely satisfied with the president's action. ''This is protection in substance as well as appearance,'' Robert S. Miller, the chief executive of Bethlehem Steel, said in a telephone interview this afternoon. Bethlehem filed for bankruptcy protection on Sept. 24, and is seeking a number of joint venture partners to keep its steel production plants open. While Mr. Bush has never discussed the subject in political terms since becoming president, he must have been mindful of political commitments made during the 2000 presidential campaign, when he and his running mate, Dick Cheney, accused President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore of failing to protect workers from low-priced imports. Mr. Bush's chief political adviser, Karl Rove, sat in on the major meetings at the White House about how to deal with the steel industry's demands, and Mr. Rove met with leaders of the steel workers' unions. While officials said he never said so in the meetings, Mr. Rove and others in the White House know that the tariffs will have the greatest effects on steel producers in West Virginia, Pennsylvania and Ohio, all critical in the coming Congressional elections. One of the big winners today was Weirton Steel of West Virginia. Weirton officials praised Mr. Bush for putting 30 percent tariffs on tin sheet, one of its biggest products. The loser was South Korea, the largest exporter of the same type of steel. While economists can make general estimates about how the increase in tariffs will translate into higher prices for consumer goods, figuring out the real cost increase for, say, an individual automobile model is next to impossible. Car makers will scramble in the next few months to get their supplies from countries exempt from the tariffs. Manufacturers may move some production to Canada or Mexico, so that the steel they buy is not subject to tariffs. And because steel prices have been rising in recent months without the tariffs, it will be difficult for Mr. Bush's opponents to blame him for the increase in the price of a specific minivan, for example. Democrats today blamed Mr. Bush for doing too little, rather than too much. ''Last week the steel companies and the steel worker unions agreed that 40 percent was the minimum average tariff needed to stabilize the industry,'' Richard A. Gephardt, the Democratic leader, said in a statement today. He said he was ''disappointed'' that the tariffs average less than 30 percent. He also noted that Mr. Bush ''did nothing'' to help with the pensions and health care costs of retirees. But the White House said that action was up to Congress, and not within the president's powers. Mr. Bush is an avowed free trader, and many members of his team -- including Lawrence Lindsey, who runs the National Economic Council, and Glenn Hubbard, the chairman of the council of economic advisers -- warned of the risks to both his free-trade credentials and the broader economy. In the past his trade representative, Robert B. Zoellick, has compared raising tariffs to raising taxes, and while White House officials sidestepped such comparisons today they admitted that the result would be greater costs to consumers. Mr. Bush's decision was the biggest action to preserve an ailing American industry since Ronald Reagan forced several nations into ''voluntary'' restraints on their steel and auto exports in the mid-1980's. Those agreements are now illegal under W.T.O. rules. So this time Mr. Bush chose another route, invoking a provision that allows a temporary tariff ''safeguard'' for three years. While the White House made no mention of it, the order Mr. Bush signed actually imposes the highest tariffs only for one year; on flat rolled steel, for example, the 30 percent tariff goes into effect within 15 days, but drops to 24 percent next year, and 18 percent in 2004. It has other holes that importing nations will seek to exploit. Commerce Secretary Donald L. Evans -- Mr. Bush's former campaign chairman and a proponent of the tariff action -- said today that 80 developing nations would be exempted. Over the weekend, the chief executive of U.S. Steel, Thomas J. Usher, warned that many countries, particularly in Asia, would ship their steel to developing countries, relabel it, and send it on to the United States. Mr. Bush also put the lowest tariffs on slab steel, an unfinished form of steel that is often used by smaller steel manufacturers to make their products. Mr. Bush's program will allow tariff-free imports of 5.4 million short tons, about equal to the imports in 2000, excluding slab steel from Canada and Mexico. That will be a boon to Russia, one of the largest producers of slab steel.

The last time America dominated the world as overwhelmingly as it does today was in the wake of World War II. So why did that America not inspire the sort of global anger that today's America does? Partly it's because the rest of the world was flat on its back then. But more important, it's because America after World War II took responsibility for making the world both a more secure place to live and a better place to live. And it expended a lot of resources, as in the Marshall Plan, to do both. Since Sept. 11, the Bush team has focused on making the world safer, but has shown little interest in making it more healthy, less poor and more environmentally sound. As a result, there has been little chance that it was going to end up safer for Americans. Therefore, President Bush's speech on Thursday announcing a $5 billion increase in foreign aid for poor countries is important -- not only as a substantive breakthrough for this administration, but also, one hopes, as a psychological one. Since Sept. 11, President Bush has often noted that the world has fundamentally changed. Yet, time after time, he has exploited the shock of Sept. 11 to argue why his same old, pre-Sept. 11 policies were still the only way to proceed -- only more so. Because of Sept. 11, he has argued, we need even deeper tax cuts for the wealthy, even more money for a pie-in-the-sky missile defense that would have been no use on Sept. 11, an even bigger defense budget and even more drilling for oil in wilderness areas. The most obvious conclusion from Sept. 11 -- that fighting terrorism around the globe will require a new, multidimensional strategy, not just a defense strategy -- was the one Mr. Bush seemed least inclined to draw, and that's why his speech should be welcomed. It will be relevant, though, only if it really signals an understanding by the Bush team that there are no walls for us to hide behind anymore, that everything is connected to everything else and that we cannot win a global war against terrorism without global allies, but we will have those allies only if we practice what the architects of the Marshall Plan practiced: enlightened self-interest, not just self-interest. Those postwar wise men persuaded others to follow us because they not only respected our power but also our wisdom and moral example. The 9/11 terrorists did not hit us because they were poor. But millions of poor people gave passive support to those terrorists because they resented our greed or our support for their bad regimes. That's why it was important that the president said our increased foreign aid must be conditioned on countries' improving their governance, rule of law, social safety nets, investment climates and anticorruption practices. We can't force elections, but we can use our aid to pressure developing countries to give their people more voice, more rule of law and a fairer slice of the pie, which are their people's real priorities. Here's a tip: The reason Islam seems like such an angry religion today is because so many Muslims are angry. The reason so many Muslims are angry is because most of them live under antidemocratic regimes backed by America, with lagging economies and shrinking opportunities for young people. Beyond just aid, though, we should also be forging free trade accords with as many Muslim nations as possible (instead of throwing up insane protectionist walls around our steel industry). At the Davos economic forum, one expert noted that Muslim countries made up 20 percent of the world's population, yet only 4 percent of the world's trade. Trade in goods brings trade in ideas. The most open, tolerant places in the Muslim world today are all trading centers: Dubai, Istanbul, Bahrain, Amman, Beirut, Jakarta, coastal India. But enlightened self-interest is not just about generosity; it's also about self-restraint. We need to find a way to ratify the Kyoto climate change treaty. It's not only the right thing to do, but it would also send a hugely positive signal to the world -- that America understands that if it's going to have lasting allies in a global war on terrorism, it has to be the best global citizen it can be. The attitude that we are entitled to consume 25 percent of the world's energy, while we're only 4 percent of the world's population, is obnoxious. Selfishness and hubris are a terrible combination. Mr. Bush has repeatedly told the world: If you're not with us, you're against us. He needs to remember this: The rest of the world is saying the same thing to us.

To the Editor:Re ''Large Ice Shelf in Antarctica Disintegrates at Great Speed'' (news article, March 20):The dramatic satellite images documenting the breakup of the Larson B ice shelf in Antarctica are a sharp reminder of how global warming can cause rapid, large-scale change. Critics of the Kyoto climate treaty point out that the global system is extremely complicated and any predictions are fraught with potential error. This is undoubtedly true; catastrophe need not accompany global warming. However, the sudden collapse of a 12,000-year-old ice shelf the size of Rhode Island indicates that the risk of fossil fuel dependence may be far too high. The technology exists to greatly increase our use of renewable energy resources. Failure to act ensures several things: more oil spills, more pollution in the lungs of city dwellers, more terrorists, more alliances with inhumane regimes. Not to mention the unlikely but horrible possibility of a global climate so altered as to cause environmental damage and human suffering more vast than any war. STEPHEN GRANT  West Newton, Mass., March 21, 2002

THE Enron-Andersen debacle has cast an unforgiving light on corporate bookkeeping, but the growing demand for accountability could extend far beyond financial statements. Pressure from investors, customers, consumer activists and even some governments is pushing more companies, particularly multinational ones, to report their nonfinancial performance, detailing the impact of their businesses on the environment and human rights. This so-called social reporting has been under way since the late 1980's, when corporations, reacting to the growing environmental movement, began publishing brochures about reducing pollution. But many of those early efforts produced little more than glossy propaganda. In the last few years, the forces of globalization and increased access to information via the Internet have helped to expand the scope of social reporting. In addition to providing environmental, health and safety reporting, companies are beginning to report on all aspects of their social performance, from the amount of waste they reuse to the wages they pay to workers abroad. Advocates of this more rigorous reporting, which they call ''sustainability reporting,'' say it provides the most accurate appraisal of a company's potential and risk.''As your number of suppliers and the number of people looking at you goes up, you need new tools for measurement,'' said Robert Massie, a founder and director of the Global Reporting Initiative, a group based in Boston that has been working with the United Nations to devise internationally accepted standards for social reporting. ''Leading indicators are not just financial.''More companies may decide that such reporting is good for business. A 1999 survey of 25,000 people worldwide by Environics International, a research firm, showed that 56 percent formed opinions of a company based on its social behavior, versus 34 percent based on financial fundamentals like profits. Forty percent said they had boycotted or considered boycotting companies they viewed as irresponsible. A handful of companies, like Royal Dutch/Shell, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, General Motors and Ford Motor, have been producing sustainability reports since the middle to late 1990's. A Web site that tracks social reporting, CorporateRegister. com, counts 487 sustainability reports published last year, up from 194 in 1995 and 7 in 1990. (Social reports of all kinds, including environmental and afety, number in the thousands.)The biggest new entry is McDonald's, which plans to release its first sustainability report the week of April 15. With operations in 121 countries, McDonald's symbolizes the expansion of American business and has been a lightning rod for activists protesting everything from American culture to genetically modified food. Bob Langert, the company's senior director for social responsibility, said the publication of a sustainability report was not prompted by any one incident. ''There is more interest in what companies like McDonald's are doing with social-type issues,'' he said. ''We want to provide a full view of where we've been, where we're at and where we're going.''Its 50-page report will address issues like beef safety, a suppliers' code of conduct and the company's treatment of overseas employees and franchise owners. Other companies working on such reports for the first time include Alcoa, International Paper and Siemens. ''There's no doubt that the world at large is looking at the broader imprint that companies leave on society,'' said Jake Siewert, a vice president at Alcoa. In another sign that social reporting is growing, some large accounting firms are jumping in, looking to expand their auditing and consulting services. Only 40 percent of social reports are now audited. ''A lot of our clients and our clients' clients are asking for this,'' said Sunil Misser, partner in charge of a new practice for corporate social programs at PriceWaterhouseCoopers. Still, there are no common standards or oversight groups, leaving wide variability in the reports and audits. For auditors, the conflicts on the financial side -- relationships that provide more than one service to clients -- can be true on the social side as well. A bigger problem to overcome may be public skepticism of corporations fed by scandals, such as the collapse of Enron and indictment of its auditor, Arthur Andersen. VOLUNTARY self-reporting by corporations lacks credibility, said David C. Korten, the author of ''When Corporations Rule the World,'' a 1995 book considered the bible of the movement against globalization. ''If we cannot trust management to put out an honest report to shareholders,'' he said, ''it would be silly to put any credibility in these social reports.''Many companies may view social reports as an opportunity to ''greenwash'' -- to highlight the good and omit the bad -- with glossy images of employees planting trees, butterflies or cupped hands holding a globe. ''We want to see specific targets that can be measured year to year,'' said Paul Scott, director of NextStep Consulting, a British firm that helps companies create these reports and runs the CorporateRegister. com database. Still, he said, ''producing a report is a good way to get management to sit up and take notice.''Indeed, social reporting, once a squishy exercise, is becoming more serious. The Global Reporting Initiative drafted guidelines a few years ago, and 100 big companies are following them. In Europe, some countries -- the Netherlands, Denmark, Norway and France -- require some sort of social reporting. More than 200 companies have signed the United Nations Global Compact, which commits them to a code of conduct that includes abolition of child labor and slave labor, recognition of union rights and responsibility for preventing environmental damage. The code has no enforcement provisions, but supporters say it is symbolically important, much as the Sullivan Principles were in pressuring South Africa to end apartheid. AT Shell, which will publish its fifth sustainability report next month, there is a conspicuous sensitivity about consulting with local groups in the planning of new projects. A pipeline completed last fall in the Philippines, for example, was routed to avoid sacred burial sites, coral beds and fishing grounds. That contrasts with Shell's old behavior, which caused a public backlash that hurt its reputation. In 1995, for example, when the company announced plans to sink an oil platform in the North Atlantic and worked with a repressive regime in Nigeria, protesters denounced the company and Shell's European sales plummeted. Mark Wade, the sustainable-development manager at Shell, said those protests ''triggered our understanding of the importance of building relationships.''In Shell's sustainability report, the company offers an annual measure of how it is doing on its commitments, like reducing emissions that many scientists say contribute to global warming. Shell's upcoming report, it said, would show the company had reduced such emissions by nearly 10 percent from 1990 levels. In contrast, the Kyoto treaty to stop global warming, which the United States has not signed, sets a 2002 goal of a 5.2 percent reduction from 1990 levels. In a move that advocates of social reporting say foreshadows corporate reporting to come, Shell will include its sustainability report in the same binding as its annual financial report for the first time this year, underscoring the message that the two go hand in hand. Most companies that publish social reports now do so separately from their financial reports. The Centre for Tomorrow's Corporation, a business-sponsored research group in London, said Shell's move portended an overhaul of the corporate annual report. ''The future is inclusive reporting,'' said Mark Goyder, the group's director. ''We want the finance director, not the environmental director, lying awake at night wondering if he has the right social performance metrics.''

After a year of urging from energy lobbyists, the administration is seeking the ouster of an American scientist who heads a global warming panel. After a year of urging from energy industry lobbyists, the Bush administration is seeking the ouster of an American scientist who for nearly six years has directed an international panel of hundreds of experts assessing global warming, several government officials have said. The specialist, Dr. Robert T. Watson, chief scientist of the World Bank, is highly regarded as an atmospheric chemist by many climate experts. He has held the unpaid position of chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change since the fall of 1996. Now his term is expiring and the State Department has chosen not to renominate him to head the panel, which is run under the auspices of the United Nations and the World Meteorological Organization. Dr. Watson is an outspoken advocate of the idea that human actions -- mainly burning oil and coal -- are contributing to global warming and must be changed to avert environmental upheavals. Last night, a State Department official said the administration was leaning toward endorsing a scientist from India, which along with other developing countries has been eager for a stronger role in the climate assessments. But many influential climate experts say they have written to the department supporting Dr. Watson. One of those letters was sent last month by Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone, an atmospheric scientist who is chancellor of the University of California, Irvine, and chairman of a National Academy of Sciences panel that assessed the international panel's climate analyses last year at the behest of the White House. In an e-mail message sent to the State Department, Dr. Cicerone urged the administration not to withdraw its support for Dr. Watson and, if it did, at least to replace him with another atmospheric scientist. Otherwise, ''such a change would greatly reduce the emphasis on science in I.P.C.C.,'' he said, referring to the climate panel. He also said it would be ''very, very difficult to find anyone better than Watson.''But energy industry lobbyists and some Republican elected officials have criticized Dr. Watson as biased and focused on building a scientific argument to justify cutting the use of coal and oil. In a letter to the White House a year ago, for example, Dr. Arthur G. Randol III, senior environmental adviser for ExxonMobil, said Dr. Watson used leaks of drafts of his panel's climate reports to further his ''personal agenda.''''Can Watson be replaced now at the request of the U.S.?'' read the letter. A copy was given to The New York Times by the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private environmental group. Dr. Randol did not respond yesterday to requests for comment. But White House officials said his letter had no bearing on decisions about the panel. The only other significant candidate nominated for panel chairman is Dr. Rajendra K. Pachauri, an Indian engineer and economist who is now one of five vice chairmen. He is highly regarded, but many scientists said his lack of grounding in atmospheric science made him an unsuitable choice. Nevertheless several lobbyists for energy companies and auto manufacturers are scheduled to meet with senior State Department officials this afternoon, when they are expected to press the administration to endorse Dr. Pachauri. One of the lobbyists said that in a two-man race, it was necessary for industry to make a choice -- and that the choice should not be Dr. Watson. The panel's assessments of climate change underpinned negotiations leading to two climate treaties, the latest of them the Kyoto Protocol, which calls for cuts in emissions of heat-trapping gases. President Bush rejected it a year ago. The panel's findings have been criticized as overly dire by energy industry officials and a few scientists. But many other experts have endorsed them, including the panel convened by the National Academy of Sciences. Campaigners at private environmental groups yesterday attacked the efforts to replace Dr. Watson. Some climate panel scientists said that other countries were planning to push for Dr. Watson to remain, and that it might be possible to craft a compromise in which the two scientists served as co-chairmen. In an interview, Dr. Watson said the most important thing was to keep the panel from becoming divided into factions. ''We've always worked well by consensus,'' he said. ''I would hope it does not come down to a divisive vote.''Correction:  April 6, 2002, Saturday  An article on Tuesday about efforts to replace the chairman of an international panel on climate change referred imprecisely to a letter sent to the White House a year ago by Dr. Arthur G. Randol III, senior environmental adviser for ExxonMobil. In the letter, Dr. Randol introduced an attached memo and wrote, ''I will call to discuss the recommendations regarding the team that can better represent the Bush Administration interests.'' It was the memo, rather than his cover note, that accused the chairman of using the panel's reports to further his ''personal agenda'' and asked whether he could ''be replaced now at the request of the U.S.'' The memo was unsigned, and a spokesman for ExxonMobil said he was unable to say who wrote it. Correction: April 6, 2002, SaturdayAn article on Tuesday about efforts to replace the chairman of an international panel on climate change referred imprecisely to a letter sent to the White House a year ago by Dr. Arthur G. Randol III, senior environmental adviser for ExxonMobil. In the letter, Dr. Randol introduced an attached memo and wrote, ''I will call to discuss the recommendations regarding the team that can better represent the Bush Administration interests.'' It was the memo, rather than his cover note, that accused the chairman of using the panel's reports to further his ''personal agenda'' and asked whether he could ''be replaced now at the request of the U.S.'' The memo was unsigned, and a spokesman for ExxonMobil said he was unable to say who wrote it.<br>

Critter glares at me across an empty table. ''I'm sorry you've come all this way,'' he says. Critter, whose legal name is Craig Marshall, is an intense young man with short-trimmed hair, a scraggly beard and flared side chops that give him the look of a singer in a rockabilly band. He is a vegetarian anarchist who spent several months living nearly 200 feet up a Douglas fir to prevent it from being cut down. Now he sits in an interview room at the Snake River Correctional Institution in the eastern Oregon desert. I've come to talk to him about crossing lines. If he'll talk.''Corporate media protects corporate interests,'' he tells me. ''You'll probably use inflammatory quotes and say I'm some crazy son of a bitch,'' he says. Critter isn't crazy, but he is a rare specimen. Using the F.B.I.'s definition of the term, Critter is a domestic terrorist. Almost two years ago, he and an accomplice were caught after they firebombed a Chevrolet dealership in Eugene, Ore. He says he did it to punish carmakers and consumers for their love affair with the gas-hogging S.U.V. Although the pair never claimed the bombing on behalf of the Earth Liberation Front (E.L.F.) -- the eco-terror group that has inflicted, along with its ally the Animal Liberation Front (A.L.F.), more than $43 million in damage on farmers, scientists, foresters, universities, housing developers and business owners -- their crime fit the profile of a classic E.L.F. action. Critter, 28, pleaded guilty and got five and a half years. His accomplice, a quiet 22-year-old forest advocate named Jeffrey Luers, aka Free, went to trial and was rewarded with 22 years and 8 months, the longest sentence ever handed down in an eco-terror case. Much of America's political conversation since Sept. 11 has focused on the definition of borders, of lines crossed. At what point does a devoted student of Islam volunteer to become a mass murderer? When does legal political protest become terrorism? As one of the few environmental advocates convicted of an eco-terror crime, Critter knows what it is to move across the boundary that separates the peaceful tree-sitter from the violent firebomber. Once he agrees to talk, Critter settles into a discussion of the revolution necessary to save a doomed planet. He describes the radical environmental circles in which he traveled as a tight-lipped culture that recognizes arson as a legitimate act of political protest. ''It takes all the tools in the toolbox to dismantle the master's machine,'' he says. ''More passive people do tree-sits. More active people are comfortable risking their well-being. There's a line a lot of people are not willing to cross. I was willing to cross it.''But why -- and why now? In some respects, we live in a golden age of ecological awareness. More Americans identify themselves as environmentalists now than at any time in the nation's history. Recycling programs, a radical notion 30 years ago, have become commonplace. Organic grocers thrive. We also find ourselves in a singularly bad time to be a terrorist in America. And yet the E.L.F. remains one of the nation's most active and destructive domestic terrorist organizations. In the weeks after Sept. 11, worldwide revulsion over the terrorist attacks inspired surprising gestures of peace. The Irish Republican Army announced that it would dismantle its weapons arsenal; Basque separatists made peace overtures. No such pause disrupted the calendar of the E.L.F. On Sept. 16, E.L.F. members ripped up oil-exploration survey markers near Moab, Utah, and left a note telling the company to ''drill in hell.'' On Oct. 15, an E.L.F. firebomb leveled a United States Bureau of Land Management wild-horse corral 80 miles north of Reno, Nev. On Nov. 6, the police discovered crude E.L.F.-style firebombs set next to two forestry buildings on the Houghton, Mich., campus of Michigan Technical University. The attacks have continued in 2002. On Jan. 26, an E.L.F.-claimed fire damaged a construction site at the University of Minnesota, where a plant-genetics research center was being built. The audacious timing of the E.L.F.'s crime spree surprised terrorism scholars, who worry that the forest monkey-wrenchers may be growing into a classic revolutionary organization.''I'm afraid these people might be the real anarchists,'' says Gary R. Perlstein, a Portland State University criminologist who has tracked the E.L.F. since its inception. ''Not just the talkers, but the bomb throwers and assassins.''There are now Web sites, videotapes and quarterly zines dedicated to the E.L.F.'s increasingly violent actions. F.B.I. agents and federal prosecutors have been able to arrest only a few of its members. And as the group widens its targets and increases the violence of its attacks, experts are wondering what further boundaries the group's supporters are willing to cross. What happens when the E.L.F. realizes that firebombs aren't getting the job done? The E.L.F. is actually a British export. In 1992, a handful of environmental advocates in Brighton, England, broke away from Earth First! to form a more radical splinter group, the Earth Liberation Front. The E.L.F.'s members, who referred to themselves as elves, abandoned aboveground politics in favor of direct action. This decoupling allowed Earth First! to concentrate on legitimate mainstream campaigns while the E.L.F. carried out the dirty work of tree spiking, sabotage and arson. Two years later, Judi Bari, the Northern California Earth First! leader, called for a similar move in the United States. ''It's time,'' she wrote in Earth First! Journal, ''to leave the night work to the elves in the woods.''The American version of the E.L.F. announced its existence in October 1996 by torching a United States Forest Service truck in Oregon's heavily logged Willamette National Forest. A few months later, the group declared its alliance with the A.L.F., which had been attacking mink farms and research laboratories since the early 1980's. ''Leave the forests alone,'' warned one communiqu, ''and no one gets hurt.''For the next year, the E.L.F. limited its attacks to traditional anti-logging and animal rights targets, burning horse corrals, a meat-packing plant and federal agriculture buildings. In 1998, the group began going after bigger game. E.L.F.-set fires did $12 million worth of damage to a ski resort in Vail, Colo., and E.L.F. members destroyed the Medford, Ore., office of U.S. Forest Industries, a private timber company. Into this drama stepped Craig Marshall and Jeffrey Luers. Luers, a child of the Southern California suburbs, became politically active as a teenager when he saw that the American government was spending billions of dollars on military projects while homeless people went hungry. He wrote to politicians but got form-letter replies. He became a door-to-door canvasser for the Sierra Club but grew disillusioned with the group. In the spring of 1998, at age 19, he hopped a freight train to Eugene and found kinship in the town's thriving anarchist community. One night at Out of the Fog, a funky downtown organic teahouse that serves as the watering hole for Eugene's circle-A crowd, Luers watched a slide show about Warner Creek, a section of the nearby Willamette National Forest that environmental advocates saved from logging by occupying the trees in 1995 and 1996.''I was like, Wow -- here's people that are getting out there, and they're actually stopping logging, they're not lobbying about stopping logging, which is what I'd just been doing for the last seven months,'' Luers told a reporter for The Portland Oregonian. (Luers, who is appealing his sentence, declined to be interviewed for this article.)A new tree-sit was born that spring. In March 1998, the Forest Service sold the logging rights for a 96-acre section along Fall Creek in the Willamette National Forest, about 35 miles southeast of Eugene, to a local timber company. Critics of the sale charged that the Forest Service had shirked its duty to complete the wildlife surveys that are required under the Northwest Forest Plan. The old-growth and second-growth Douglas firs along Fall Creek are home to the red tree vole, a fir-needle-eating rodent that's a dietary staple of the northern spotted owl, which is still threatened. While mainstream environmental groups sued the Forest Service, a small band of forest advocates blocked the logging road and camped on high-canopy platforms to stop the cut. Luers was among them. A tree-sit is a cold, harsh, lonely way to save a forest. At Fall Creek, Luers and fellow advocates built plywood-and-tarp dwellings 200 feet up trees they gave names like Happy and Fanghorn. A bucket hanging beneath the platform served as the bathroom. Craig Marshall joined the sit that fall. An Easterner reared in a small Massachusetts town, Marshall held political beliefs that weren't so much pro-environment as anti-authority. ''I never had much use for people telling me what to do,'' he recalls. ''Back in the fifth grade, I was already questioning the Pledge of Allegiance.'' After hitchhiking to Eugene, Marshall heard about the Fall Creek sit at Out of the Fog and immediately volunteered. During the warm months, idealistic advocates flocked to Fall Creek from all over the country, drawn to their generation's version of Freedom Summer. Come November, the cold Pacific storms drove away all but a handful of advocates, including Marshall and Luers. Marshall changed his name to Critter. Luers became Free. The two became friends. When you're living in a tree-sit, there's a lot of time to swap stories of the horrors of industrial forestry in action. And in truth, it's not a pretty sight. The romantic vision of a chain-saw-toting lumberjack bears as much resemblance to mechanized forestry as a pioneer hog farmer to an industrial slaughterhouse. A hydraulic feller buncher, which looks like a power shovel with claws and saws, can grasp, cut and delimb a Douglas fir in one terrifyingly swift motion. There's also a lot of time in a tree-sit to consider the great chasm that exists between mainstream eco-consciousness and the dire situation faced by the planet. In the past few years, scientists have issued ever more gloomy warnings about global warming. Biologists tell us we have entered a period of catastrophic species extinction. And when you're out there living as one with the wind, rain, mud, mushrooms and squirrels, it occurs to you that recycling our beer cans just ain't gonna get the job done. So you start to look for ways to shock humanity into action.''If one in 10 people care about the planet,'' Marshall says, ''that one person has to do 10 times as much as those other 9.''At this point, Marshall and Luers may have begun talking about taking things a step further, but they probably kept their conversations to themselves. ''Veteran activists only allow a select few to know about their involvement with the E.L.F./A.L.F.,'' instructs a security primer posted on several forest-advocacy Web sites. ''And those few consist of the cell members who they do the actions with AND NO ONE ELSE!''The E.L.F. is made up of a series of small cells that remain mostly unaware of one another's identities and plans. In ''Igniting the Revolution: An Introduction to the Earth Liberation Front,'' a $10 video sold in Portland's counterculture bookshops, Craig Rosebraugh, then the E.L.F.'s spokesman, urges volunteers to start their own units rather than try to join one. ''There's no realistic chance of becoming active in an already existing cell,'' he says. ''Take initiative; form your own cell.''Other groups, including the I.R.A., Al Qaeda and right-wing patriot factions, were organized around this leaderless resistance model but never were truly leaderless. Their imagined world ultimately requires a hierarchy. The E.L.F., rooted in a philosophy of anarchist primitivism, dreams of peaceful leaderless tribes living in robust ecosystems. ''In a tribe, you take care of each other,'' Critter says. ''There's no need for Big Brother to take care of you.''This is the conundrum of the E.L.F., and the reason the group is so difficult to track or to stop: there is no membership; there are only acts. Anyone can join -- tonight -- by torching a science lab. Existing cells may applaud your crime but will not contact you. And so law enforcement agencies have found the group impossible to infiltrate. ''They know each other and don't tolerate strangers,'' says Bob Holland, a Eugene, Ore., police detective who has been investigating eco-terror crimes since 1997. ''It's not like infiltrating the Mafia, where you can go to Joe Bonanno and say, 'The goodfellas down the street recommended me.' These people are hanging with people they've known for years, and when they decide to do a direct action, they're the only ones talking about it.''Beginning in December 1999, the E.L.F. began directing its firebombs against an array of new and sometimes puzzling targets. Arson fires burned the laboratory offices of researchers studying plant genetics at Michigan State University and the University of Washington. More E.L.F. fires destroyed houses under construction on Long Island and in Bloomington, Ind. E.L.F. members smashed windows at an Old Navy store in Huntington, N.Y., and tried to burn down a Nike outlet in Albertville, Minn. The Republican Party Committee headquarters in Monroe County, Ind., was burned because, according to an E.L.F. communiqu, the party supported the extension of an interstate highway. What happened? In a word, Seattle. When the antiglobalization movement exploded at the November 1999 World Trade Organization meeting, E.L.F. advocates realized two things. First, violence gets attention. Second, their targets were too limited. After Seattle, the E.L.F. realized that its beef wasn't merely with the Forest Service; the problem was global capitalism itself. Any symbol of that system -- a new subdivision, a botany lab, a political clubhouse, a car dealership -- became a target. A year into the Fall Creek sit, Critter began to question the effectiveness of his own limited campaign. While he was saving the tree beneath him, he says, he watched a section of forest across the valley fall to the saw. At the same time, government prosecutors began to squeeze some of the region's prominent radicals. In February 2000, the home and office of Rosebraugh, the E.L.F. spokesman, were raided. It's difficult to mark the exact moment when a radical advocate chooses to cross the line separating civil disobedience from violent crime. But sometime in May or June 2000, Jeffrey Luers and Craig Marshall decided to take that step. Behind them trailed years of political frustration and legal hassles. Within them burned the conviction that greedy humans were annihilating the natural world. Ahead of them lay Chaos Days 2000. In the late spring of 2000, a local advocacy group called Eugene Active Existence organized the Seven Week Revolt, a smash-the-state festival to commemorate the one-year anniversary of the city's June 18, 1999, anarchist riot. The days leading up to June 18 were dubbed Chaos Days, and it was during that week that Luers and Marshall came down from the trees to join in the parties and protests. Chanting slogans wasn't enough for them, though.''I realized that the only way to hurt a corporation is in the wallet,'' Marshall says. ''If you do it hard enough and long enough, they'll go out of business.''They chose a target: Joe Romania Chevrolet, a car dealership at the edge of the University of Oregon campus. To the tree dwellers, Romania's blocklong lineup of $25,000 trucks and S.U.V.'s symbolized consumer decadence at its worst. ''They're gas-guzzling monsters, destroying everything they encounter,'' Marshall later explained. ''They're a status symbol for rich American consumers, who are killing more people on this planet than anyone else.''The elves' weapon of choice remains the firebomb, schematics for which can be downloaded from the E.L.F. Web site. ''On a pound-for-pound basis,'' the anonymous authors explain, ''incendiaries can do more damage than explosives against many type [sic] targets if properly used.'' The 20-page pamphlet includes instructions on creating flake aluminum-sulfur igniters, thermate incendiary devices and homemade napalm. Critter and Free's devices were crude but effective: gallon milk jugs filled with fuel and stopped with sponge wicks. Marshall and Luers did their due diligence, observing the rounds of the night watchman. ''Precautions were taken to make sure nobody was hurt,'' Marshall later said. Soon after midnight on June 16, Luers and Marshall parked a borrowed car across the busy boulevard from Joe Romania Chevrolet. They nervously passed a cigarette back and forth. Carrying their sloshing milk jugs, they crossed the street and followed a dark bicycle path to the crowded lot, where they placed the devices under two new Chevy pickups and sparked a Bic lighter to the wicks.''Down under the truck, my heart is pounding,'' Luers later recalled in an account written for Earth First! Journal. ''Wow! I'm really doing this. Why? Then I remember being a kid growing up in Los Angeles, having to stay inside some days because the smog was too bad to go outside. I was 6 [expletive] years old, and I couldn't play outside because the air was hazardous to my health. It has gotten worse since!''As the fire raged, Marshall and Luers drove to the neighboring town of Springfield. E.L.F. actions are sometimes claimed with spray paint at the scene of the crime or via an anonymous encrypted e-mail message sent to the E.L.F. spokesperson or posted on the E.L.F. Web site, but the truck burners were ambivalent about claiming their action. ''I don't know if we would or wouldn't have gotten a communiqu out,'' Marshall later said. ''The point isn't to let people know. The point is to stop it then and there.''What Luers and Marshall didn't know was that undercover cops from the Eugene Police Department had been tailing them all day. Rumors of a big anarchist party had spread through Eugene, and the police were hoping Luers and Marshall would lead them to the clandestine kegger. Although they didn't actually see them set the fires, the police observed them acting suspicious around the dealership. After a dispatcher put out a call about a fire at Joe Romania Chevrolet, the police arrested Luers and Marshall. They never made it to the party. Marshall pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit arson and unlawful possession of a destructive device and received a five-and-a-half-year sentence. Luers might have gotten a similar sentence, but a police search turned up evidence linking him to an earlier attempted arson. Though Luers denied any connection to the earlier case, he was found guilty of that crime, too, and was sentenced to 22 years and 8 months in state prison. The story of Critter and Free illustrates the local political and psychological forces that help inspire a single act of eco-terrorism, but there may be larger historical influences at work as well. Consider the idea that eco-terrorists are at least partly driven by the rising and falling fortunes of their cause. Forty years ago, James C. Davies, a political scientist, proposed the J-curve theory of revolution. Uprisings are most likely to occur, Davies said, when a prolonged period of economic and social progress is followed by a short period of sharp reversal. Christopher Hewitt, a University of Maryland, Baltimore County sociologist who is writing a book about terrorism in America, makes a compelling case for adapting the J-curve theory to domestic terrorism. ''When your hopes have been raised and you feel there's a chance for victory through legitimate political means, you'd be foolish to resort to terrorism,'' Hewitt says. ''Terrorism is a high-cost option, a weapon of the weak, a tool of last resort. But if your movement suddenly collapses or suffers political reversals, then some activists will be tempted to go for terrorism.''Two examples: Many antiwar advocates believed that President Johnson's decision not to seek a second term in 1968 signaled the end of the Vietnam conflict. When his successor, Richard Nixon, expanded the war, the most radical activists gravitated to the Weather Underground, a group responsible for several high-profile bombings during the 1970's. Similarly, Ronald Reagan's 1980 election led anti-abortion advocates to expect the demise of Roe v. Wade. But by decade's end, abortion remained legal, and the tactics of radical activists had escalated from pickets to blockades to bombings. With the election of Bill Clinton in 1992, the hopes raised by Reagan were finally crushed. That's when abortion doctors started getting assassinated. The emergence of the E.L.F. fits a disturbingly similar pattern. Environmentalists saw Clinton's election as the harbinger of a wave of ecological reform. Eight years of a Democratic administration did bring progress: federal agencies were greened up, air and water standards improved and great swaths of wilderness were saved from development. But eco-advocates were so embittered by Clinton's failure to bring about sweeping change that Al Gore had to fight for the Sierra Club's endorsement in the 2000 election. The E.L.F. set off its first major firebomb, in fact, the year after Clinton's 1995 timber-salvage-rider dispute. The salvage rider made it easy for logging companies to harvest trees they claimed were diseased or damaged. It was a sweet deal for the timber industry, a setback for environmentalists. For hardcore greens it was Clinton's Judas moment. Following the slow disenchantment of the Clinton era, radical environmentalists are now faced with George W. Bush, the Texas oilman who wants to pump crude out of the Arctic National Wildlife Preserve, rejects the Kyoto global-warming protocols and offers environmentalists three more years of pro-industry rollbacks. Radical greens find themselves in the same situation abortion foes faced in 1993. Although the protection of all life remains one of the E.L.F.'s major tenets, some observers wonder if that line will soon be crossed. ''Up until now, they haven't harmed the people they're trying to harm,'' says Gary Perlstein, the domestic-terrorism expert. ''When they destroy a tree farm in Clatskanie, Ore., they're not hurting the Weyerhaeusers of the world. I worry that they're going to eventually see that. And then the true believers among them may say, 'Well, maybe we have to assassinate the president of Weyerhaeuser.'''The E.L.F.'s rhetoric hasn't gone that far yet, but its supporters describe the war they're waging in increasingly dire terms. ''If someone had their hands around your throat strangling you, would you gather petition signatures to present to them, politely asking them to stop?'' asks a recent issue of Resistance, a quarterly E.L.F. zine. ''Would you go limp as a symbolic gesture of your noncooperation? Hopefully you would defend yourself by any means necessary.''I put the question to Craig Marshall: In a perfect world, what would we do to save the earth? ''First, knock down all the concrete,'' he says. Thinking further, he adds: ''The problem is, we've gone too far already. There's no easy solution. For life to survive as we know it, millions of people are going to have to die. It's sad to say that, but it's true. Millions of people are already dying -- it's just gonna have to start happening here.''That's a pretty chilling statement, I tell him.''I'm not saying anybody needs to be executed,'' he says. ''But there's a need for decreasing the population. Look, I don't take life. I fight to protect it. I'm doing the best I can to make sure life survives. Not only human life -- all the other life that humans are extinguishing.''Bruce Barcott is a contributing editor at Outside magazine.

To the Editor:You report that disarmament experts say recent United States policy to disregard new international treaties is undercutting efforts by other countries to strengthen the international rule of law (''Washington Is Criticized for Growing Reluctance to Sign Treaties,'' news article, April 4). The failure to support the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, the International Criminal Court and the Kyoto protocol on global warming is hurting the United States in the eyes of our allies. The conservative wing of the Republican Party promotes its isolationist views to President Bush. We've all seen where this isolationism has gotten us. Now Mr. Bush has been forced to retreat from his ''hands off'' position on the Middle East. It's time for President Bush to start listening to Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other moderates in his administration. MARK BRADY  Dix Hills, N.Y., April 5, 2002

Under the presidency of George W. Bush, oil interests have taken over the global warming debate. Under the presidency of George W. Bush, the environmental and energy policies of our government are completely dominated by a group of current and former oil and chemical company executives who are trying to dismantle America's ability to force them to reduce the extremely dangerous levels of pollution in the earth's atmosphere. The first step was to withdraw from the agreement reached in Kyoto to begin limiting worldwide emissions of greenhouse gases. Then the administration cancelled an agreement requiring automobile companies to make the leap to more fuel-efficient vehicles. Other acts of sabotage are taking place behind the scenes. Just as Enron executives were allowed to interview candidates for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission -- and to veto those they didn't think would approve of Enron's agenda -- ExxonMobil has been allowed to veto the United States government's selection of who will head the prestigious scientific panel that monitors global warming. Dr. Robert Watson, the highly respected leader of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change, was blackballed in a memo to the White House from the nation's largest oil company. The memo had its effect last Friday, when Dr. Watson lost his bid for re-election after the administration threw its weight behind the ''let's drag our feet'' candidate, Dr. Rajendra Pachauri of New Delhi, who is known for his virulent anti-American statements. Why is this happening? Because the largest polluters know their only hope for escaping restrictions lies in promoting confusion about global warming. Just as Enron needed auditors who wouldn't blow the whistle when the company lied about the magnitude of its future liabilities, the administration needs scientific reviews that won't sound the alarm on the destruction of the earth's climate balance. How long they get away with it depends on how long they can sow confusion and doubt. But with folks wearing bikinis in Boston in the middle of April and with the massive melting of ice at both poles and in nearly every mountain glacier on earth, public awareness and concern are growing rapidly. At a time when the world needs enduring leadership from the United States to rally all nations to join in a concerted effort to stop global warming, the administration is working overtime to block any progress whatsoever. So tomorrow, on this Earth Day, more than ever before, we need real, forward-thinking leadership and a renewed focus on the environment. True leadership means ensuring that we take the necessary steps to leave a cleaner environment for generations to come -- and that means strengthening environmental protections. Instead, this administration's so-called Clean Skies initiative actually increases air pollution levels by allowing more toxic mercury, nitrogen oxide and sulfur emissions than does current law. Put simply, on the environment, this administration has consistently sold out America's future in return for short-term political gains. True leadership means guaranteeing our national security and role as a world leader -- and one of the best ways to do this is by decreasing our dangerous dependence on foreign oil, so that America cannot be held hostage to oil imports and tinhorn tyrants like Saddam Hussein. But instead this administration is now investing less in energy innovation and conservation and more in corporate subsidies for oil exploration and extraction and nuclear power. True leadership means assuring an economy that rewards innovation and productivity. We can do so by leading the world in investments in technological innovations that will result in environment-friendly products like more efficient cars and renewable energy sources. Such investments would open up the door for new economic growth. But this administration is taking only those steps that increase our addiction to fossil fuels and outdated and inefficient technologies. On all these fronts, this administration has walked away from the tough choices and has instead chosen to subsidize the solutions of the past. Instead of leading, it has attempted to mislead. Instead of sharing a vision with the people, the administration has given access to special interests. We can return to the path of progress, on which we value economic growth that rewards innovation and productivity and meets the needs of our families and of national security. We can return to the days of record growth coupled with record improvement in the air we breathe. We can return to true leadership on the environment. We ought to look at the environment as a critical piece of the nation we will be. I urge Americans to re-engage in a forward-looking discussion of how to secure our nation's energy needs while pursuing environmental policies that will make us safer, more efficient and more respectful stewards of our planet and our nation's great potential. Al Gore, vice president from 1993 to 2001, is a professor at Fisk University and Middle Tennessee State University.

If you ask me, the press has this whole story about whether President Bush had a warning of a possible attack before 9/11, and didn't share it, upside down. The failure to prevent Sept. 11 was not a failure of intelligence or coordination. It was a failure of imagination. Even if all the raw intelligence signals had been shared among the F.B.I., the C.I.A. and the White House, I'm convinced that there was no one there who would have put them all together, who would have imagined evil on the scale Osama bin Laden did. Osama bin Laden was (or is) a unique character. He's a combination of Charles Manson and Jack Welch -- a truly evil, twisted personality, but with the organizational skills of a top corporate manager, who translated his evil into a global campaign that rocked a superpower. In some ways, I'm glad that America (outside Hollywood) is not full of people with bin Laden-like imaginations. One Timothy McVeigh is enough. Imagining evil of this magnitude simply does not come naturally to the American character, which is why, even after we are repeatedly confronted with it, we keep reverting to our natural, navely optimistic selves. Because our open society is so much based on trust, and that trust is so hard-wired into the American character and citizenry, we can't get rid of it -- even when we so obviously should. So someone drives a truck bomb into the U.S. embassy in Beirut, and we still don't really protect the Marine barracks there from a similar, but much bigger, attack a few months later. Someone blows up two U.S. embassies in East Africa with truck bombs, and we still don't imagine that someone would sail an exploding dinghy into a destroyer, the U.S.S. Cole, a few years later. Someone tries to blow up the World Trade Center in 1993 with a truck bomb, and the guy who did it tells us he had also wanted to slam a plane into the C.I.A., but we still couldn't imagine someone doing just that to the Twin Towers on 9/11. So I don't fault the president for not having imagined evil of this magnitude. But given the increasingly lethal nature of terrorism, we are going to have to adapt. We need an ''Office of Evil,'' whose job would be to constantly sift all intelligence data and imagine what the most twisted mind might be up to. No, I don't blame President Bush at all for his failure to imagine evil. I blame him for something much worse: his failure to imagine good. I blame him for squandering all the positive feeling in America after 9/11, particularly among young Americans who wanted to be drafted for a great project that would strengthen America in some lasting way -- a Manhattan project for energy independence. Such a project could have enlisted young people in a national movement for greater conservation and enlisted science and industry in a crash effort to produce enough renewable energy, efficiencies and domestic production to wean us gradually off oil imports. Such a project would not only have made us safer by making us independent of countries who share none of our values. It would also have made us safer by giving the world a much stronger reason to support our war on terrorism. There is no way we can be successful in this war without partners, and there is no way America will have lasting partners, especially in Europe, unless it is perceived as being the best global citizen it can be. And the best way to start conveying that would be by reducing our energy gluttony and ratifying the Kyoto treaty to reduce global warming. President Bush is not alone in this failure. He has had the full cooperation of the Democratic Party leadership, which has been just as lacking in imagination. This has made it easy for Mr. Bush, and his oil-industry paymasters, to get away with it. We and our kids are going to regret this. Because a war on terrorism that is fought only by sending soldiers to Afghanistan or by tightening our borders will ultimately be unsatisfying. Such a war is important, but it can never be definitively won. Someone will always slip through. But a war on terrorism that, with some imagination, is broadly defined as making America safer by also making it better is a war that could be won. It's a war that could ensure that something lasting comes out of 9/11, other than longer lines at the airport -- and that something would be enhanced respect for America and a country and a planet that would be greener, cleaner and safer in the broadest sense. Too bad we don't have a president who could imagine that.

President Bush leaves early Wednesday morning for Europe, where he is almost certain to be greeted by demonstrators who believe him a bully and by allies in the campaign against terrorism who are increasingly unhappy about everything from steel tariffs to his determination to topple Saddam Hussein. But as he departs, his senior aides describe a very different man, who has learned important lessons about diplomacy in 16 months and whose early missteps, they say, provided the lessons that made possible the arms agreement with Russia that will be the centerpiece of his trip.''You need time for an administration to grow,'' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said in an interview on Monday in his office, where he was far more candid than most administration officials in describing how Mr. Bush's approach to the world has evolved in the past year.''I think as a result of 9/11 particularly, he sees the value of coalitions and friends,'' Secretary Powell said. ''He saw the value of having people on his side.''That was all part of the education of a new American president, a man Secretary Powell describes as ''a quick learner'' who has mastered his briefing books and is now more likely than he was a year ago to rely on his own instincts. ''He had never been involved in this level of international interaction or diplomatic activity,'' Secretary Powell said. The result is a man who this week in Moscow will sound dramatically different from the George W. Bush who as a candidate declared that ''the verdict is still out'' on Russia's new president, Vladimir V. Putin. Back then, Mr. Bush talked of a ''corrupt and favored elite'' in Russia, and said relations would depend on whether Mr. Putin kept ''bombing innocent women and children'' in Chechnya. Russian troops are still fighting a guerrilla war in Chechnya, but Mr. Bush is unlikely to dwell on that as he lands in Russia for the first time. Already he has hailed Mr. Putin as a warrior against terrorism, a visionary and a friend. By next Tuesday, the two men plan to bury the arms race and make Russia a junior partner with NATO.By any measure, it is a startling turnabout, and one that aides seemed at pains to explain as they balanced acknowledgments of past mistakes against the portrait of their boss as a quick study. Secretary Powell, for instance, cited the vivid lesson that came in the ferocity of the European reaction to the president's decision to reject the Kyoto protocol on fighting global warming. ''Kyoto -- this is not talking out of school -- was not handled as well as it should have been,'' he said. ''And when the blowback came I think it was a sobering experience that everything the American president does has international repercussions.''Even today, some of Mr. Bush's Republican allies describe his foreign policy as disjointed, with Mr. Bush talking about his faith in building alliances one day and warning that he will deal with Iraq with or without the help of Arab states the next. The president, conceded Sen. Chuck Hagel, the Nebraska Republican, who ''came to office with one of the thinnest rsums in foreign policy, immediately drove himself into a lot of cul-de-sacs, and then began to find his way.''These days, Mr. Bush dials around the world constantly to explain himself, yet his decisions to impose tariffs of up to 30 percent on steel imported from Europe, Russia and Asia and the ''unsigning'' of the treaty creating the international criminal court still leave his fellow leaders wondering which Bush they will be meeting this week, the man who with a wry smile talks of his new appreciation of diplomatic nuance, or the Bush who forges ahead alone if he has to. Mr. Bush's mixed message has so far produced more results with Russia than in the Middle East or Asia. But even in Europe, where Mr. Bush has cultivated relationships with Chancellor Gerhard Schrder of Germany, President Jacques Chirac of France, and Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy -- all of whom he will visit this week -- his public image is still one of a leader less interested in assembling allies than pursuing his own course.''They came in with three bugaboos -- about China, about Russia, and about North Korea -- not wanting to talk to any of them,'' one of Mr. Bush's informal advisers during the campaign said of the president and his aides. ''But now he's learning to trust his instincts. And he is learning what all presidents learn -- that the world is a big place, and you can't row the boat alone.''At the White House, Mr. Bush's aides, led by his national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, insist that Mr. Bush never held views as simplistic as they were portrayed, even while she argues that his approach today is far more nuanced.''He spends far more time on these issues now,'' she said, ticking off the three national security meetings a week, the hours of morning terrorism briefings, and the succession of calls he makes to foreign leaders. For his part, Secretary Powell argued that the approach that led to the successful negotiations with Russia over reducing nuclear arsenals was shaped months before Sept. 11. It was the result, he said, of a melding of lessons learned from successes -- like the negotiations with China that won the release of the crew of an American spyplane -- as well as missteps, like the president's blunt declaration that the Kyoto protocol was ''dead.''''The learning experience of the China incident was be patient,'' Secretary Powell argued, recalling how he and others advised the president to ignore a letter from the Chinese leadership that threatened to unravel days of negotiations over the crew's return. The incident, Secretary Powell said, taught Mr. Bush the virtues of letting the State Department, the Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense Department ''shape the situation for the president for a little while,'' before he stepped in. He and Ms. Rice argued that both the China talks and the Kyoto fiasco taught Mr. Bush some lessons on how to accomplish the abandonment of the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty with Russia: Signal your moves, give the other side a lot of time to think about it, and coordinate the response. Over a period of months, they made it clear to Mr. Putin that the president would jettison the treaty if it could not be fixed, and made the final decision after the two leaders met at the Bush ranch in Crawford, Tex., in November. Mr. Putin, recognizing he had few cards to play, expressed his objections to Secretary Powell, smiled at him, ''and then began talking about the relationship beyond the ABM,'' the secretary recalled. That led to the hurried negotiations on the treaty to be signed on Friday, codifying each president's commitment to possess no more than 2,200 operational warheads by 2012. It was a lopsided negotiation, during which Mr. Putin, who cannot afford a larger nuclear force, won only one major victory: a formal treaty that binds further presidents. For Mr. Bush, this trip is mostly about demonstrating the strength of his personal relationship with Mr. Putin, quite a stretch for a president who, during the campaign, criticized Bill Clinton for investing too much in his relationship with Boris N. Yeltsin, and not enough on Russian reform. Former Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger said Mr. Bush's new reliance on personal diplomacy reflected ''a belief that slowly overcomes all presidents after they are in office that personal relationships are more important than they seemed before they are in office. They become less interested in what their subordinates call the fundamentals of a relationship, and more interested in what other leaders tell them.''But Mr. Bush argues that this is a fundamentally different Russia, one that has ended its constant internal debate on whether to join the West. Administration officials also argue that Mr. Putin has changed far more than Mr. Bush has in the past two years.''What we knew about him wasn't very encouraging,'' Ms. Rice recalled, when asked her own very negative characterizations of Mr. Putin during the campaign. ''I think now what we know about him is encouraging.''Mr. Bush, she said, was determined now to make good on the promise he made Mr. Putin when they first met in Slovenia a year ago. ''He told him, 'Let's not be Brezhnev and Nixon; let's be Bush and Putin.' ''

President Bush stood today in the well of Germany's reconstructed Reichstag and told Parliament that the terrorist groups the United States and its allies are hunting down constitute a ''new totalitarian threat,'' and in a clear reference to Hitler, compared the current struggle to a past generation's battle against those who ''killed in the name of racial purity.''Mr. Bush's speech under the spectacular glass dome of the Reichstag, the symbol of a unified Germany, sought to reassure clearly skeptical Germans about his intentions as he pursues his next steps against terrorism, particularly in Iraq, and presses American interests in environmental protection and aid to developing nations. Many Europeans are also concerned about American policy in the Middle East and about American plans for NATO.During a news conference with Chancellor Gerhard Schrder, he promised to consult with Germany and other allies before taking action against Iraq and its suspected weapons of mass destruction, but he made it clear that he would not back off, saying, ''We've got to deal with it.''Mr. Bush's remarks, the first by an American president in the Reichstag, were received politely. But his appearance was punctuated at one point by a demonstration by four members of a former East German Communist party who unveiled a banner that said ''Stop Your Wars.'' Mr. Bush missed a few beats of his speech, then kept speaking as a few members of Parliament walked out in protest. Mr. Bush used much of the speech to celebrate Germany's achievements, and Europe's, in the 13 years since the Berlin Wall fell just feet from where he was speaking. ''Ours is the first generation in a hundred years that does not expect and does not fear the next European war,'' he said to applause that even some of his harshest critics seemed to join. Invoking the resolute declarations of Presidents Kennedy and Reagan during their visits to a divided Berlin, Mr. Bush made his case that the United States, an expanded NATO, and now Russia face a new mission: to defeat regimes that may place nuclear, chemical or biological weapons within reach of terrorists.''If these regimes and their terrorist allies were to perfect these capabilities, no inner voice of reason, no hint of conscience would prevent their use,'' he said, charging that terrorists hate ''Jews and Christians and all Muslims who disagree with them.''Turning to members of the Green Party and others in the chamber who have protested America's approach to terrorism as unilateral, extreme and a violation of international law, he said, ''Wishful thinking might bring comfort, but not security.''He appeared, at moments, to be invoking the lessons of the 1930's when efforts to appease Hitler failed, and he made it clear he did not plan to repeat the mistake. ''Call this a strategic challenge; call it, as I do, the axis of evil; call it by any name you choose, but let us speak the truth.'' He added, ''We must confront this conspiracy against our liberty and against our lives.''In the midst of his 20-hour visit here, Mr. Bush was clearly concerned about dampening expanding questions about the intelligence failures before the Sept. 11 attacks, including questions about what he knew. In his news conference, he insisted that he welcomes a Congressional investigation, but only ''in the Intelligence Committee,'' which, he said, understands ''the obligations of upholding our secrets and our sources and methods of collecting intelligence.''He deflected a question about whether he would release the Central Intelligence Agency analysis given to him on Aug. 6 that raised the possibility that Al Qaeda was trying to hijack American aircraft. But a senior administration official said in Washington that Mr. Bush would not set a precedent by turning over to Congress any copies of his classified Presidential Daily Briefing. Mr. Bush clearly knew he faced a skeptical audience, both in the chamber and across Europe. He seemed to adjust his tone to one of gentle persuasion rather than argument. He repeatedly thanked Germany for its contributions to the fight against the Taliban and Al Qaeda, an action that the Parliament authorized after considerable debate over the first deployment of German troops for battle since World War II.Carrying the comparisons to World War II and the cold war to the next step, the president said Sept. 11 marked a change of eras as dramatic as Pearl Harbor or the first days of the Berlin blockade, when the United States had to mount an airlift to keep the Western-controlled parts of the city fed. He carefully stepped around the most contentious subjects of disagreement, including his rejection of the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, his refusal to sign the treaty creating the International Criminal Court, and his decision to aid American steelmakers by imposing large tariffs on foreign-made steel. He started off by thanking the members of Parliament, as they sat in purple seats before jet-black desks, for coming into a special session to hear him. ''I can just imagine how my Congress would react if I called them back to hear a speech of mine when they were on vacation,'' he said to laughter. As he spoke, Mr. Bush's wife, Laura, who has been touring Europe in recent days, and members of his foreign policy team sat in the sleek glass-and-metal galleries that give the new home of Parliament an airy look inside the walls of the 108-year-old Reichstag building. Also along for the trip, which will include Russia, France and Italy, were Karen Hughes, the influential counselor who is leaving the White House this summer, and, notably, Karl Rove, his longtime policy adviser, whose presence seemed to underscore the expansion of his domestic political portfolio to global matters. Quickly, Mr. Bush and his team received a lesson in the politics of modern Europe. No sooner had they entered the chamber than Mr. Bush was both welcomed and directly challenged by the Parliament's president, Wolfgang Thierse, a member of Mr. Schrder's Social Democrats. Mr. Thierse complimented the American president for taking the time to assemble a coalition to fight terrorism, declaring, ''Your reaction to Sept. 11 proved that all those were wrong who thought a new American unilateralism was emerging.''But then Mr. Thierse warned, in comments clearly aimed at the visiting president, that the need for such coalitions extends to other arenas. ''The pursuit of unilateral interests proves short-sighted more and more frequently,'' he said, urging Mr. Bush to ''continue together on the road mapped out by the Kyoto protocol'' and to ratify the court treaty. Mr. Bush made it clear earlier in the day that he has no intention of reconsidering his opposition to the Kyoto treaty. In his whirlwind tour here, Mr. Bush did no sightseeing. His motorcade speeded through a sealed-off downtown, past both the reminders of the Nazi era and the cranes that are creating a new Berlin in the spaces left after the wall tumbled. He acknowledged at one point this morning his frustration at not seeing more, and not speaking to ordinary Germans -- the closest he came was an invitation-only crowd at a restaurant where he had dessert with Mr. Schrder on Wednesday night. But he said ''that's just life in the bubble'' of security that surrounds a president. He never mentioned another possible reason, the street protests that greeted his arrival. At the same time, he seemed attuned to the city's efforts to come to terms with its past and the historical sensitivities that still pervade the body politic here.''The history of our time is written in the life of Berlin,'' he said in his speech. ''In this building, the fires of hatred were set that swept across the world,'' he added, in an allusion to the burning of the Reichstag on Feb. 27, 1933, an act of arson that historians now view as the symbol of the death of parliamentary democracy in Germany as Hitler's National Socialists rose to power. At another point during the news conference, Mr. Bush used a line about Saddam Hussein that he frequently employs at home, calling him ''a dictator who gassed his own people.'' But it was striking in the context of Berlin: Mr. Bush spoke just a mile from the gathering point where, 60 years ago, Berlin's Jews were collected for transport to the concentration camps where many of them were gassed as well. Chancellor Schrder did not react to the comment. But at another point, the German leader, who faces a tough election fight this fall, continued to distance himself from Mr. Bush's clear willingness to use military action to unseat Mr. Hussein. With Mr. Bush standing next to him, Mr. Schrder said the world had to ''exercise a lot of political pressure'' to get international arms inspectors into Iraq. He urged that ''we not speculate'' about further action in Iraq until further consultations with the Bush administration.

President George W. Bush appeared to be yearning for his bed after arriving at the villa of the American ambassador to Italy, shortly after 10:30 tonight. After six stops in five days, including two rather late nights with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who could blame him? Mr. Bush is clearly a very tired man. His staff says so. He admitted to jet lag at a news conference at lyse Palace on Sunday, just after asking to be reminded of the elements of a multipart question he had been asked moments before. ''That's what happens when you are over 55,'' he said to his host, Jacques Chirac, who is pushing 70 and arched his eyebrows at the explanation. It wasn't the only moment Mr. Bush seemed in serious need of caffeine, or Ronald Reagan's more leisurely approach to foreign travel. Instead, he moves between countries the way his father did -- aerobic travel, like the family sport of aerobic golf. But the pace is taking an obvious toll, even on a fit baby-boomer president who keeps a treadmill on Air Force One. Equally exhausted reporters following Mr. Bush on his whirlwind European tour, many of whom are younger than 55, were quick to recognize the embarrassing signs of this experiment in sleep deprivation. At the hour when Mr. Bush might prefer to be packing it in, Europeans are just thinking about dinner. And when in Rome -- or Berlin, or Moscow, or St. Petersburg -- you eat when the local leaders do. He was out until 11 p. m. the first night, sipping coffee in a Berlin caf. On Friday night, it was dinner at the Putins' until 12:30 a. m. The next night he was out late at the ballet and on a cruise in St. Petersburg, getting home just before midnight. An aide who has been with him for much of the trip conceded, ''He's dragging a bit by the end of these intense days.'' And Mr. Bush is far more prone to rhetorical missteps when he's droopy. In Germany, at a news conference with Prime Minister Gerhard Schrder, he talked of the West's obligation ''to help Russia securitize the dismantling -- the dismantled nuclear warheads.'' That comment prompted one of Mr. Bush's foreign policy aides to crack that ''We'd be happy to have the stuff locked up -- we don't really expect anyone to buy shares in it.''In Moscow, he had no apologies to Thomas Jefferson when he told religious leaders that, ''we hold dear what our Declaration of Independence says, that all have got uninalienable rights, endowed by a Creator.''In St. Petersburg, though, Mr. Bush seemed to have a pretty good comeback when a student asked if he were worried about the brain-drain from Russia to the West. ''It's going to take a lot of brains in Russia to create a drain,'' he said. Punching Bag for PoliticsAnyone wondering why Mr. Bush was greeted so warmly in Russia, yet took zingers about the environment, farm policy, steel, and American unilateralism from other European leaders, should consider this: Russia may be a new democracy, but Mr. Putin is a long way from an election. Not true for Mr. Schrder, who faces a tough fight in September and could not afford, his advisers say, to seem too cozy with a president who is regularly berated in the German press. ''Schrder had to show a little independence from the president,'' a German diplomat said. ''You know -- we're happy to finally have you here, but don't get too close.''Mr. Chirac, facing some parliamentary elections in two weeks, pointed out that the United States consumes too much of the world's energy. In case Mr. Bush missed it the first time, on Sunday, Mr. Chirac repeated it at Normandy today. And on Sunday he needled the president a bit for signing a farm bill that subsidizes American farmers while American negotiators are telling Europe to let their farmers discover the workings of the free market. Then there is Mr. Putin, who is trying to turn a weak hand into some cold cash. Once an opponent of missile defenses, he now wants a piece of the contracts to build the system's interceptors. Once interested in an alliance with China against American power, he is now interested jumping aboard the unilateralist bandwagon. At St. Petersburg State University, Mr. Putin's alma mater, not a single student berated Mr. Putin's guest over the Kyoto Protocol on global warming, steel tariffs or Iraq. Instead, they asked what made him a good manager. Tongues, TwistedA lesson for correspondents covering Mr. Bush: When abroad, stick to English in the president's presence. Offenders might otherwise find themselves in the situation David Gregory, an NBC News White House correspondent, who appeared to raise Mr. Bush's ire Sunday afternoon at lyse Palace when he asked a rather in-your-face question to a tired president, then broke into French to seek Mr. Chirac's opinion.''I wonder why it is you think there are such strong sentiments in Europe against you and against this administration?'' Mr. Gregory asked Mr. Bush in English, ''Why, particularly, there's a view that you and your administration are trying to impose America's will on the rest of the world, particularly when it comes to the Middle East and where the war on terrorism goes next?'' Turning to Mr. Chirac, Mr. Gregory broke into French and asked him to comment on the same question. Perhaps Mr. Bush thought the French question was directed at him, or perhaps he thought Mr. Gregory was showing off. Whatever the case, Mr. Bush, his voice dripping with sarcasm, said ''Very good, the guy memorizes four words, and he plays like he's intercontinental.'' (Mr. Gregory offered to go on in French, but that only made things worse.)''I'm impressed -- que bueno,'' said Mr. Bush, using the Spanish phrase for ''how wonderful.'' He added: ''Now I'm literate in two languages.''Mr. Gregory seemed a bit abashed, but others noted that, during the trip, Russian, German and French reporters posed questions to Mr. Bush in English, and in their native tongue to other leaders. C'est la vie. Reporter's Notebook  Correction:  May 29, 2002, Wednesday  A Reporter's Notebook article yesterday about President Bush's trip to Europe misstated the title of Gerhard Schrder of Germany, who appeared with him at a press conference. Mr. Schrder is chancellor, not prime minister. Correction: May 29, 2002, WednesdayA Reporter's Notebook article yesterday about President Bush's trip to Europe misstated the title of Gerhard Schrder of Germany, who appeared with him at a press conference. Mr. Schrder is chancellor, not prime minister.<br>

To make the point that European nations, unlike the United States, are squarely behind the Kyoto treaty for the reduction of greenhouse gases, diplomats and officials from all 15 members of the European Union presented their countries' ratifications to the United Nations in a group ceremony. Seventy countries have ratified the treaty, more than the required 55, but together the ratifying nations must account for at least 55 percent of total emissions from industrial countries, and that target has not been met. Japan is to ratify the pact next week, and the Europeans are pressing Russia to ratify so the treaty can come into force. Barbara Crossette (NYT)

In a stark shift for the Bush administration, the United States has sent a climate report to the United Nations detailing the far-reaching effects of global warming. In a stark shift for the Bush administration, the United States has sent a climate report to the United Nations detailing specific and far-reaching effects that it says global warming will inflict on the American environment. In the report, the administration for the first time mostly blames human actions for recent global warming. It says the main culprit is the burning of fossil fuels that send heat-trapping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. But while the report says the United States will be substantially changed in the next few decades -- ''very likely'' seeing the disruption of snow-fed water supplies, more stifling heat waves and the permanent disappearance of Rocky Mountain meadows and coastal marshes, for example -- it does not propose any major shift in the administration's policy on greenhouse gases. It recommends adapting to inevitable changes. It does not recommend making rapid reductions in greenhouse gases to limit warming, the approach favored by many environmental groups and countries that have accepted the Kyoto Protocol, a climate treaty written in the Clinton administration that was rejected by Mr. Bush. The new document, ''U.S. Climate Action Report 2002,'' strongly concludes that no matter what is done to cut emissions in the future, nothing can be done about the environmental consequences of several decades' worth of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases already in the atmosphere. Its emphasis on adapting to the inevitable fits in neatly with the climate plan Mr. Bush announced in February. He called for voluntary measures that would allow gas emissions to continue to rise, with the goal of slowing the rate of growth. Yet the new report's predictions present a sharp contrast to previous statements on climate change by the administration, which has always spoken in generalities and emphasized the need for much more research to resolve scientific questions. The report, in fact, puts a substantial distance between the administration and companies that produce or, like automakers, depend on fossil fuels. Many companies and trade groups have continued to run publicity and lobbying campaigns questioning the validity of the science pointing to damaging results of global warming. The distancing could be an effort to rebuild Mr. Bush's environmental credentials after a bruising stretch of defeats on stances that favor energy production over conservation, notably the failure to win a Senate vote opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to exploratory oil drilling. But the report has alienated environmentalists, too. Late last week, after it was posted on the Web site of the Environmental Protection Agency, private environmental groups pounced on it, saying it pointed to a jarring disconnect between the administration's findings on the climate problem and its proposed solutions.''The Bush administration now admits that global warming will change America's most unique wild places and wildlife forever,'' said Mark Van Putten, the president of the National Wildlife Federation, a private environmental group. ''How can it acknowledge global warming is a disaster in the making and then refuse to help solve the problem, especially when solutions are so clear?''Scott McClellan, a White House spokesman, said, ''It is important to move forward on the president's strategies for addressing the challenge of climate change, and that's what we're continuing to do.''Many companies and trade groups had sought last year to tone down parts of the report, the third prepared by the United States under the requirements of a 1992 climate treaty but the first under President Bush. For the most part, the document does not reflect industry's wishes, which were conveyed in letters during a period of public comment on a draft last year. The report emphasizes that global warming carries potential benefits for the nation, including increased agricultural and forest growth from longer growing seasons, and from more rainfall and carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. But it says environmental havoc is coming as well. ''Some of the goods and services lost through the disappearance or fragmentation of natural ecosystems are likely to be costly or impossible to replace,'' the report says. The report also warns of the substantial disruption of snow-fed water supplies, the loss of coastal and mountain ecosystems and more frequent heat waves. ''A few ecosystems, such as alpine meadows in the Rocky Mountains and some barrier islands, are likely to disappear entirely in some areas,'' it says. ''Other ecosystems, such as Southeastern forests, are likely to experience major species shifts or break up into a mosaic of grasslands, woodlands and forests.''Despite arguments by oil industry groups that the evidence is not yet clear, the report unambiguously states that humans are the likely cause of most of the recent warming. Phrases were adopted wholesale from a National Academy of Sciences climate study, which was requested last spring by the White House and concluded that the warming was a serious problem. A government official familiar with the new report said that it had been under review at the White House from January until mid-April, but that few substantive changes were made. Without a news release or announcement, the new report was shipped last week to the United Nations offices that administer the treaty and posted on the Web (www. epa .gov/globalwarming/publications /car/). A senior administration official involved in climate policy played down the significance of the report, explaining that policies on emissions or international treaties would not change as a result. Global warming has become a significant, if second-tier, political issue recently, particularly since James M. Jeffords, the Vermont independent, became chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee last year. Mr. Jeffords has criticized the president's policy. The new report is the latest in a series on greenhouse gases, climate research, energy policies and related matters that are required of signatories to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was signed by Mr. Bush's father and ratified by the Senate. The convention lacks binding obligations to reduce gas emissions like those in the Kyoto Protocol. Mr. Bush and administration officials had previously been careful to avoid specifics and couch their views on coming climate shifts with substantial caveats. The president and his aides often described climate change as a ''serious issue,'' but rarely as a serious problem. The report contains some caveats of its own, but states that the warming trend has been under way for several decades and is likely to continue.''Because of the momentum in the climate system and natural climate variability, adapting to a changing climate is inevitable,'' the report says. ''The question is whether we adapt poorly or well.''Several industry groups said the qualifications in parts of the report were welcome, but added that the overall message was still more dire than the facts justified and would confuse policy makers. Dr. Russell O. Jones, a senior economist for the American Petroleum Institute who wrote a letter to the Environmental Protection Agency a year ago seeking to purge projections of specific environmental impacts from the report, said it was ''frustrating'' to see that they remained.''Adding the caveats is useful, but the results are still as meaningless,'' Dr. Jones said.

As it is required to do under international treaty, the Bush administration has sent to the United Nations a report on global warming that is much more pessimistic than its earlier calculations about the environmental damage that unchecked warming could cause. A White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, said the report is reason ''to move forward on the president's strategies for addressing the challenge of climate change.'' There is only one thing wrong with this picture. President Bush has no serious strategies for climate change. Indeed, Mr. Bush has essentially withdrawn from the field. He rejected the Kyoto accord on climate change and repudiated a campaign pledge to seek firm limits on carbon dioxide, the main contributor to the warming of the earth's atmosphere. He then proposed a voluntary scheme. It appears from the U.N. report to consist largely of finding ways to adapt to warming instead of preventing it. Congress has done no better. The only encouraging news is on the state level. Massachusetts and New Hampshire have approved bills aimed at cutting power plant emissions of carbon dioxide. In New York, a commission appointed by Gov. George Pataki will shortly give him a set of aggressive recommendations to help the state reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases. Encouraging as the state actions are, global warming requires a national response. There is one last chance to get the ball rolling in Congress this term and to send a positive signal to other countries. The Senate Environment and Public Works Committee will soon begin writing a comprehensive air pollution bill. The committee has before it a strong proposal framed by the chairman, James Jeffords, and a less ambitious but useful plan advanced by a few power companies that have at last faced up to their obligation to address the issue. There is no comparable Bush initiative on the table. The Jeffords and industry plans address the four major pollutants: mercury; nitrogen oxides that produce smog; sulfur dioxide, which causes acid rain; and carbon dioxide. Mr. Bush's sketchy ''Clear Skies'' proposal addresses only the first three. To Mr. Jeffords, that makes the Bush plan a nonstarter. What's interesting is that some of the president's putative allies among the power companies -- including Northeastern utilities like Consolidated Edison and Public Service Electric and Gas of New Jersey -- see things the same way. The reason is summed up in what managers like to call ''business certainty.'' They know that carbon dioxide will eventually be regulated, and they would like to begin now to tailor investment strategies to deal with all four pollutants at once. The technologies that work for mercury, sulfur and nitrogen oxide -- so-called ''end of pipe'' controls like scrubbers -- do virtually nothing to reduce carbon dioxide. But there are other strategies -- switching to cleaner fuels, investing in ''clean coal'' technologies and alternative fuels, making existing plants more efficient -- that could help utilities respond to clean air concerns in a more coordinated, cost-efficient way. Unfortunately, the biggest and dirtiest utilities, which make the most noise in Congress and are also among Mr. Bush's biggest contributors, hate the four-pollutant approach because they rely almost entirely on coal and their cleanup costs are likely to be quite large. Senator Jeffords's task is to make sure that his bill commands a big enough majority in his committee to justify bringing it to the Senate floor, where a brutal battle awaits. The Senate may be as far as any bill goes -- the House has not been hospitable to imaginative thinking on energy and the environment. But it's important to get a good plan on the table before the fall elections, and to start moving the country along the right path. The choices could not be clearer. One is to continue to rely on older technologies that condemn us to a future of polluted cities and further warming. The other is to redesign our energy system so as to reduce America's dependence on carbon-based fuels and send a signal to the rest of the world that we are finally getting serious about climate change.

Japan ratified an international accord on limiting emissions of heat-trapping gasses on Tuesday, and said it would lobby the United States to do the same. Japan ratified an international accord on limiting emissions of heat-trapping gasses today, ending more than six months of internal debate, and said it would lobby the United States and other large polluters to do the same. Japan's ratification of the agreement, despite the opposition of many major industries, was an important step forward for the accord, known as the Kyoto Protocol on global warming.''In order to ensure the effectiveness of measures against global warming, it is essential that all countries make efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,'' Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi said in a statement. Japan is the fourth-largest emitter of carbon dioxide, which is produced by the burning of fossil fuels and is believed to be the most important heat-trapping gas and the main cause of global warming. The leading polluters are the United States, the European Union and Russia. To meet the politically complex conditions for the Kyoto accord to become international law, it must be ratified by at least 55 countries and by the industrialized nations that emitted at least 55 percent of the industrialized world's carbon dioxide in 1990. Despite the rejection of Kyoto by the United States, the protocol could take effect with ratifications by the European Union, Russia, Japan and either Canada or Poland. The 15 countries of the European Union, acting in unison, presented their ratifications of the protocol on Friday, but the United States and Russia have not agreed to its terms. The Bush administration has rejected the agreement on economic and scientific grounds, saying that emissions reductions would be costly, and asserting that the causes of global warming are poorly understood. Recently, however, the United States has acknowledged a link between human activity and global warming. Russia, whose cabinet has given preliminary approval to the accord, is holding out for extra credits toward emissions targets and may not ratify it until next year, say people who are following the issue. Under the protocol, industrialized nations would be required to cut emissions of greenhouse gases by an average of 5 percent over the period 2008 through 2012, compared with 1990 levels. Japan has pledged to cut its emissions by 6 percent over this period. Environmentalists point to a substantial rise in Japan's output of greenhouse gasses since 1990 and say the country will have difficulty meeting its target. ''Japan is going to be very behind in its efforts to achieve its target without new measures,'' said Yurika Ayukawa, of World Wide Fund for Nature Japan, according to Reuters news service. Japan's ratification of the protocol appeared in doubt late last year, with the powerful Finance and Foreign Ministries reportedly joining to oppose it. The Environment Ministry was the accord's strongest advocate, aided by the fact that the protocol is named after the Japanese city where it was signed during a United Nations conference. When a former environment minister who was involved in negotiating the pact, Yoriko Kawaguchi, took over as foreign minister recently, she put her office's weight behind the emissions control plan. ''I am deeply moved and pleased that Japan will become a party to the Kyoto protocol,'' Ms. Kawaguchi said today.

Under intense criticism from conservatives, President Bush distanced himself today from a report by his administration concluding that humans were to blame for far-reaching effects of global warming on the environment. The report, drafted by the Environmental Protection Agency and reviewed by several other agencies and the White House, was sent to the United Nations early last week. The report said the United States would be substantially changed in the next few decades by global warming, although it called for no rapid response. Reporters asked Mr. Bush about the report today.''I read the report put out by the bureaucracy,'' he said. He said he still opposed the Kyoto treaty, which Japan ratified today. The treaty calls for the mandatory reduction of greenhouse gases by industrial nations. Critics across the political spectrum said that Mr. Bush was trying to appear more moderate to environmentalists while signaling to conservatives and industry that he would not promote the views contained in the report. Mr. Bush's spokesman emphasized that the report carried numerous caveats about the uncertainty that still exists about the science of climate change. Ari Fleischer, the spokesman, obviously anticipating a question about the report at the daily White House briefing, said: ''There is 'considerable uncertainty' -- that's in this recent report -- relating to the science of climate change. This report submitted to the United Nations also recognizes that any 'definitive prediction of potential outcomes is not yet feasible' and that 'one of the weakest links in our knowledge is the connection between global and regional predictions of climate change.' ''Instead of the Kyoto treaty, Mr. Bush has called for voluntary measures that would allow gas emissions to continue to rise, with the goal of slowing the rate of growth. But in this report, the administration said for the first time that the United States would be significantly affected by global warming in the next few decades. The report alarmed conservatives and representatives of various industries, especially utilities that rely on old technologies, and they accused Mr. Bush of flip-flopping on an important issue. Rush Limbaugh, the conservative radio talk-show host, today called Mr. Bush ''George W. Al Gore,'' a reference to former Vice President Al Gore, who has long been concerned about global warming. But the moniker seemed to be an effort to deride Mr. Bush for adopting what many conservatives view as Mr. Gore's environmental extremism and to compliment the president for undercutting Mr. Gore on his signature issue.''All of this takes Al Gore's No. 1 issue away from him,'' Mr. Limbaugh told listeners. He predicted that the Senate majority leader, Senator Tom Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, and the House minority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, would be ''banging their heads against the wall'' because the report might pre-empt them from making a political issue of global warming. Christopher C. Horner, a lawyer in Washington and senior fellow at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a conservative research group, said today that Mr. Bush had distanced himself from the report ''because of concern from the right that he was going to accept the European environmental world view, that he had changed his mind as the report indicated he had.''Mr. Horner said Mr. Bush could not possibly accept the premise of the report without also saying that the United States would do something about it. ''It was obvious to him that it's not tenable to say yes, we're aggressively killing the planet and then not do something aggressive about it,'' he said. ''Our fear was that he would have to take severe action,'' after years of promising that he would not. But he said Mr. Bush was now in more of a bind because he could not dismiss the report as the product of bureaucrats without responding to it. The implication in Mr. Bush's dismissal, he said, was, ''There goes Governor Whitman again,'' a reference to Christie Whitman, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, who has sometimes been at odds with Mr. Bush over approaches to environmental problems. Joe Martyak, a spokesman for Mrs. Whitman, said that was an incorrect interpretation. The report said nothing new, Mr. Martyak said, and Mrs. Whitman ''agrees with the president that his plan is the best approach to dealing with greenhouse gasses.''Phil Clapp, president of the National Environmental Trust, said that Mr. Bush's response today reflected the difficult political position the report put him in. ''This is the same naked politics that this administration has exhibited on every major environmental issue,'' Mr. Clapp said.

Very weird. The Bush administration has acknowledged that the U.S. will experience far-reaching and, in some cases, devastating environmental consequences as a result of global warming. But it does not plan to do much about it. The administration has been so poor when it comes to climate change that this odd bit of news was initially seen as some sort of progress. It was thought, momentarily, that the president might be starting to pull his head out of the increasingly hot sand on this issue. The administration's interagency report, which was compiled by the Environmental Protection Agency, notes that the warming of the U.S. is expected to be greater in the 21st century than in the 20th, and will affect nearly every region of the country. Seas are expected to rise, causing an additional loss of coastal wetlands. Storm surges will pose a greater threat to coastal communities. We'll have to endure more stifling heat waves, and the disruption of snow-fed water supplies. Some treasured ecosystems, such as the Rocky Mountain meadows and certain coral reefs and barrier islands, are likely to disappear entirely. In addition to acknowledging that the earth is already sizzling, the report made it clear that human activity -- the burning of fossil fuels that release heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere -- was the primary culprit. This was no more than a statement of the obvious for most reputable scientists. But the acknowledgment was a first for the environmentally challenged Bush administration. And yet even this most minimal acceptance of reality was too much for the troglodyte wing of the president's party. Shrieks of outrage arose among conservatives, who immediately and loudly demanded that the president turn his back on the report and bury his head even more deeply in the sand. So on Tuesday there was George W. Bush dutifully distancing himself from his own administration's handiwork. He assured one and all that he had no plans to lead any assault on global warming. He was coldly dismissive of the interagency effort. ''I read the report put out by the bureaucracy,'' he said. That must have been pretty demoralizing for the people who worked hard to put the report together. If Mr. Bush did read it, he saw in Chapter 6 an interesting encapsulation of the projected global warming experience in the U.S. over the next few decades. Citing ''plausible'' model scenarios, the report said many areas of the country would undergo a change comparable to ''an overall northward shift'' in weather systems and climate conditions. ''The central tier of states would experience climate conditions roughly equivalent to those now experienced by the southern tier, and the northern tier would experience conditions much like the central tier.''This change is already under way. Some areas are experiencing ''a shorter duration of lake ice,'' and there's already been ''a northward shift in the distributions of some species of butterflies.''These are changes that force you to wonder what kind of environment lies in wait just two or three generations hence. And yet we continue, with very little restraint, to spew out the so-called greenhouse gases. The United States is by far the biggest offender on the planet, producing about 25 percent of all the greenhouse gas emissions in the world. But the U.S. has refused to participate in the Kyoto Protocol, an international treaty that calls for the mandatory reduction of greenhouse gases by industrial nations. And the U.S. has refused to impose tough mandatory reductions on its own. Japan ratified the Kyoto Protocol on Tuesday. And the 15 members of the European Union jointly presented their ratification to the U.N. last week. But with the mightiest power on the planet unwilling to participate, and unwilling to formulate a real alternative, the gases will just keep building and building, causing the planet to get warmer and warmer. What we have here is a very serious problem that we understand and could do something about. But so far, because of a lack of presidential leadership, we've taken a pass. The E.P.A. report was called ''U.S. Climate Action Report -- 2002.'' It should have been called the ''Inaction Report.''E-mail: bobherb@nytimes. com

In its business-as-usual approach to climate change, the Bush administration is increasingly out of step not only with other industrialized powers, but also with the growing support in this country for action to prevent global warming. The administration's oddly two-sided report last week to the United Nations brings the White House into the scientific mainstream on the subject -- acknowledging that human activity is probably the cause of global warming and that America itself faces serious consequences -- but at the same time lays out a strategy ensuring that American emissions of greenhouse gases will continue rising sharply for at least a decade. Last week the European Union and its 15 member states completed en masse their ratification of the emissions-limiting treaty that President Bush has rejected, the Kyoto Protocol. This week Japan followed suit. Russia expects to ratify by the end of the year, meaning only one or two smaller countries would be needed to put the treaty into effect. (Ratifying countries must account for at least 55 percent of developed country emissions in 1990.)The administration is also ignoring a growing domestic recognition of the need to act. Persuaded that the risks of climate change are real and that restraints on emissions are inevitable, many American companies are working on carbon reduction. To be sure, many others, especially in the energy and oil businesses, are strongly resistant. But dozens of major corporations like Alcoa, DuPont and Intel are among those setting their own targets for lower emissions. For many, there are financial payoffs, too -- improved efficiencies, lower costs and increased sales of energy-saving products. State governments are also moving ahead. New Hampshire recently became the third state to adopt mandatory controls on carbon emissions from power plants. New Jersey is aiming to reduce statewide emissions by 3.5 percent from 1990 levels in the years before 2005. All six New England states, in a compact with five Eastern Canadian provinces, have pledged to reduce their emissions to 10 percent below 1990 levels by 2020. Even in Congress, the tide is beginning to turn. Twice as many climate change measures were introduced in the past year as in the previous four years combined, many with strong support from both Democrats and Republicans. Scientists project that a century's worth of greenhouse gas releases, mostly from burning fossil fuels, have already bought us a few degrees of warming in the decades ahead. The challenge is heading off further warming by gradually weaning ourselves from fossil fuels. This transition to a low-carbon economy will require a new industrial revolution. We must look to the marketplace to carry it out. Only the market can mobilize the ingenuity, investment and productive capacity needed to develop and disperse new technologies on such a large scale. But the marketplace will deliver only if it perceives a demand, and providing that demand is a role for government. A modest but logical first step in the U.S. is a measure passed unanimously by the Senate in April encouraging companies to disclose their greenhouse gas emissions voluntarily. If after five years less than 60 percent of emissions are being reported to the public, the measure would change this voluntary reporting system to a mandatory one. A similar approach helped dramatically reduce toxic air and water pollution nationwide. This legislation should be accepted by the House and signed by the president. Ultimately, though, the market must be driven by policies that set realistic, binding targets for reducing emissions and give companies the flexibility to achieve them as affordably as possible. The Bush administration's own report shows the danger in its remaining stubbornly out of step. The longer the United States waits, the graver the risks -- and the cost of averting them. Eileen Claussen is president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change.

President Bush continues to stumble on the issue of global warming. President Bush continues to stumble on the issue of global warming. Last year, to the dismay of America's allies, he rejected the 1997 Kyoto Protocol committing industrialized nations to reduce greenhouse gases. He also reneged on his campaign pledge to impose mandatory caps on carbon dioxide, the most important of those gases. Now he has dismissed a report written by his own experts. It asserts that human activities are largely responsible for global warming and warns that the environmental consequences could be severe. The report is the third in a series of studies required by a climate treaty signed by Mr. Bush's father in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, but the first issued by the new administration. It was presented to the United Nations last week and appeared unannounced on the Environmental Protection Agency's Web site. It does not openly challenge the voluntary approach Mr. Bush has recommended. But it is a serious study reflecting the views of scientists in six federal agencies, including the President's Council on Environmental Quality, and its findings align the administration with most mainstream scientists as to the causes and consequences of climate change. It deserves better than Mr. Bush's contemptuous response: ''I read the report put out by the bureaucracy,'' he said, before repeating his opposition to Kyoto. The report obviously presented Mr. Bush with a ticklish problem. Having abandoned Kyoto and his campaign pledges, he had left himself without a meaningful strategy to deal with climate change. To acknowledge the truth of the study would have required him to offer such a strategy, or at least something more imaginative than the pallid voluntarism favored by many of his corporate friends and big campaign contributors. So he chose to brush it off. His timing was unfortunate. On Tuesday Japan ratified the Kyoto agreement, as have the members of the European Union. These countries do not expect Mr. Bush to drop his opposition to Kyoto. But they have a right to expect something more than a casual rejection of inconvenient truths.

To the Editor:Re ''Global Warming Follies'' (editorial, June 8):The main reason President Bush rejects the Kyoto Protocol is based on faulty reasoning; he believes that it would hurt the American economy. In fact, the opposite is true. What is bad for Exxon is not necessarily bad for the United States economy. Ratifying Kyoto would spur new technologies and create millions of new jobs. This is just what our economy needs. LYNN KEE  Austin, Tex., June 8, 2002

The photo ops are guaranteed to promote Canada as a pristine oasis of Rocky Mountain tranquillity when President Bush and the other Group of 8 leaders discuss the world's problems Wednesday and Thursday in the resort village of Kananaskis. But the Canadian security forces are preparing extraordinary measures in this normally quiet Victorian capital and around western Alberta Province to control the kind of violent demonstrations that marred the last such meeting of industrial world leaders, in the Italian port city of Genoa, and the Summit of the Americas in Quebec City last year. A wide assortment of protest groups have been quiet about their exact plans. But they have organized a few thousand demonstrators from around Canada and the United States to march this week against globalization, free trade and perceived corporate greed, while supporting ratification of the Kyoto treaty as an antidote to global warming. Kananaskis, the leaders' picture-postcard meeting place 60 miles west of Calgary, consists of three small hotels, a post office and a general store set in the shadow of soaring Mount Kidd and amid two lush golf courses. They are not likely to see any protests there, which is perhaps the main reason Prime Minister Jean Chrtien chose the spot. His goal was to minimize the amount of time leaders spent in high-security motorcades and maximize the time talking face to face, without the distraction of protests and journalists. He has said he will try to focus the leaders on Africa, hoping they will agree that it needs more aid, trade and investment -- especially in those countries that strengthen democratic institutions and pursue free market policies. However, in light of President Bush's demand on Monday that Yasir Arafat be replaced as Palestinian leader before the United States will support an independent Palestinian state, it now appears likely that the leaders will try to resuscitate a Middle East peace process. Another likely topic is recently increased subsidies for American farmers and higher American tariffs on steel and softwood lumber. Mr. Chrtien told reporters on Monday that although he was committed to allowing free, peaceful protest, he would not tolerate violence. Canada was shaken in April 2001 by the scene of thousands of protesters clashing with police officers at the Quebec summit meeting of hemispheric leaders, which resulted in nearly 400 arrests and injuries to 300 police officers, protesters and bystanders. With Ottawa the expected site of most protests this time, federal officials are girding in readiness to face a group of demonstrators who call their coalition Take the Capital. There is concern that anarchists may try to rush Parliament Hill, the symbol of Canadian democracy. To minimize possible damages, workers have taken down the wrought-iron lighting fixtures that line the parliamentary entranceway and built a steel and concrete bunker around the Centennial Flame monument, which was first lighted on New Year's Eve 1966 to commemorate the country's 100th birthday. The National Gallery of Canada, the Canadian Museum of Contemporary Photography and other cultural and business institutions will close early on Wednesday or not open at all during the summit meeting.''We are entitled to have demonstrations,'' Mr. Chrtien said. ''I even organized some in my youth. But they have to be peaceful. Nothing has to be destroyed, and the police force is taking the required measures.''As for the Kananaskis region, only one road runs through it, which will simplify the security task for the 4,500 police officers and 6,000 soldiers protecting the leaders. The plan is for the forces to block the road and secure a 15-mile perimeter around the village. Any protesters who try to break through the perimeter will face not only troops equipped with assault rifles but also the possibility of an encounter with cougars, wolves and grizzly bears. A 330-mile-radius no-flight zone has been extended over the village, with any violators to be either forced or shot down by CF-18 fighters or ground-to-air missiles. The total cost of security for the two-day meeting has been estimated to exceed $200 million. In Calgary, city workers erected a concrete barrier around City Hall and another fence around the media center where international journalists will receive summit briefings. The city government has rented two armored vehicles capable of withstanding gunshots for riot control.

President Bush arrived here tonight for the annual summit meeting of major industrialized nations, but instead of basking in compliments for his actions to combat terrorism, he faced skepticism over his demand that Yasir Arafat be replaced. Mr. Bush got a first taste of the diplomatic dance he is likely to see more of here when he met this evening with the meeting's host, Prime Minister Jean Chrtien of Canada. Mr. Chrtien embraced the idea of a ''quick election'' in the Palestinian territories, but then said: ''The president talked about perhaps it will be better to replace Mr. Arafat. I don't have the specific point of view on that.''Mr. Bush himself said little about his speech today. Asked about Israel's continued incursions into the West Bank, he said, ''Everybody has got a right to defend themselves,'' but, sensitive not to tip the balance too far in one direction, quickly added, ''There also had to be a vision toward a way forward.''Administration officials professed to be unfazed by the criticism, and aboard Air Force One today Mr. Bush's press secretary, Ari Fleischer, said the reaction to the speech ''has been good.'' White House officials appeared to be hearing the parts of the reaction they wanted to hear, just as Arab and European allies seemed to choose only parts of the speech for praise. But as leaders of the Group of 8 from around the world arrived here tonight and flew by helicopter to Kananaskis, a remote mountain resort 60 miles into the Canadian Rockies where they are sealed off from protesters and the press, there was little doubt that Mr. Bush's attempt to force Mr. Arafat from power would dominate the unscripted moments of the meeting. France, Germany and the European Union all criticized some aspects of Mr. Bush's approach before their leaders arrived here, even while praising the president for setting a loose timeline of three years for the creation of a Palestinian state and for calling for Israel's eventual withdrawal to its pre-1967 borders. But it was clear that Mr. Bush, who obviously hoped for an endorsement of his Mideast approach by the leaders here, will have to argue his case. ''I would not be surprised if the leaders discussed with the president their thoughts about the speech,'' Mr. Fleischer said. Among the skeptics it is clear he will have to convince is Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, who is due here late on Wednesday. Mr. Annan warned today that the American insistence on free elections among the Palestinian people could easily backfire. ''You could find yourself in a situation that the radicals are the ones that get elected, and it would be the result of a democratic process and we have to accept that,'' Mr. Annan said. President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, who will join the political discussions here but not the economic strategy sessions, said before he left Moscow that it would be ''dangerous and mistaken'' to remove Mr. Arafat because doing so ''would only radicalize the Palestinian movement.''What makes the dynamic at this meeting potentially the most interesting, though, is that Mr. Bush and the rest of the leaders will be arguing not only over Mideast policy, but also over a broad agenda of other differences that were submerged for months after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. At the summit meeting last year in Genoa, Mr. Bush and his allies promised to pick up the pieces on their differences over the Kyoto protocol on global warming, but in the year since there has been little progress. Trade tensions have worsened: European leaders made it clear they believe Mr. Bush has turned his back on his commitment to free markets by blocking steel imports and raising subsidies to farmers.''I very much rely on the Canadians to be more outspoken here when it comes to criticizing'' the United States, the German chancellor, Gerhard Schrder, told reporters as he visited Mr Chrtien. ''Because I -- speaking not only for Germany, but also for Europe -- have to say that we who sit in glass houses should ideally not be throwing stones.''Perhaps in an effort to defuse the criticism before it starts, Mr. Bush's trade officials have been rapidly issuing exemptions from the steel tariffs. That allows the president to argue at home that he acted to protect the American steel industry, and tell his allies that their most important products will not be affected. But today Robert S. Miller Jr., the chairman of Bethlehem Steel, charged that ''granting a large number of exemptions will negate the original purpose of the president's imposition of tariffs -- the recovery of the American steel industry.''The Europeans are also complaining that the farm bill that Mr. Bush signed last month will greatly increase American subsidies to farmers. The Europeans, Canada and Japan do the same, of course -- today Canada was found in violation of World Trade Organization rules governing dairy supports. But Mr. Bush has seriously undercut his argument that these subsidies should be gradually eliminated. Of course, these differences will be politely couched in public: since the summit meetings began in 1975, there has been an unwritten rule that the leaders emphasize their common goals, which in this case will include increasing aid to Africa and working out a common method of increasing airplane security. The summit meetings were also created to keep the global economy from veering off course, and there is concern that the major economies may be headed for more trouble. The sharp fall in the American stock market, along with renewed financial crises in Latin America and yet another year with little sign of economic recovery in Japan, are rekindling concern that whatever economic progress seemed under way early this year has ended. MIDEAST TURMOIL: GROUP OF 8

Do you remember the character Pig-Pen in the ''Peanuts'' cartoons? He was always covered with dirt and grime. He was cute, but he was a walking sludge heap, filthy and proud of it. He once told Charlie Brown, ''I have affixed to me the dirt and dust of countless ages. Who am I to disturb history?''For me, Pig-Pen's attitude embodies President Bush's approach to the environment. We've been trashing, soiling, even destroying the wonders of nature for countless ages. Why stop now? Who is Mr. Bush to step in and curb this venerable orgy of pollution, this grand tradition of fouling our own nest? Oh, the skies may once have been clear and the waters sparkling and clean. But you can't have that and progress, too. Can you? This week we learned that the Bush administration plans to cut funding for the cleanup of 33 toxic waste sites in 18 states. As The Times's Katharine Seelye reported, this means ''that work is likely to grind to a halt on some of the most seriously polluted sites in the country.''The cuts were ordered because the Superfund toxic waste cleanup program is running out of money. Rather than showing the leadership necessary to replenish the fund, the president plans to reduce its payouts by cleaning up fewer sites. Pig-Pen would have been proud. This is not a minor matter. The sites targeted by the Superfund program are horribly polluted, in many cases with cancer-causing substances. Millions of Americans live within a few miles of these sites. The Superfund decision is the kind of environmental move we've come to expect from the Bush administration. Mother Nature has been known to tremble at the sound of the president's approaching footsteps. He's an environmental disaster zone. In February a top enforcement official at the Environmental Protection Agency, Eric Schaeffer, quit because of Bush administration policies that he said undermined the agency's efforts to crack down on industrial polluters. Mr. Schaeffer said he felt he was ''fighting a White House that seems determined to weaken the rules we are trying to enforce.''That, of course, is exactly what this White House is doing. Within weeks of Mr. Schaeffer's resignation came official word that the administration was relaxing the air quality regulations that applied to older coal-fired power plants, a step backward that delighted the administration's industrial pals. During this same period, the president broke his campaign promise to regulate the industrial emissions of carbon dioxide, a move that, among other things, would have helped in the fight to slow the increase in global warming. Mr. Bush has also turned his back on the Kyoto Protocol, which would require industrial nations to reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The president was even disdainful of his own administration's report on global warming, which acknowledged that the U.S. would experience far-reaching and, in some cases, devastating environmental consequences as a result of the climate change. The president's views on global warming seem aligned with those of the muddle-headed conservative groups in Texas that have been forcing rewrites in textbooks to fit their political and spiritual agendas. In one environmental science textbook, the following was added:''In the past, the earth has been much warmer than it is now, and fossils of sea creatures show us that the sea level was much higher than it is today. So does it really matter if the world gets warmer?''Senator Joseph Lieberman, not exactly a left-winger on the environment or anything else, gave a speech in California in February in which he assailed the president's lack of leadership on global warming and other environmental issues. He characterized the president's energy policy as ''mired in crude oil'' and said Mr. Bush had been ''AWOL in the war against environmental pollution.''Several states, fed up with Mr. Bush's capitulation to industry on these matters, have moved on their own to protect the environment and develop more progressive energy policies. Simply stated, the president has behaved irresponsibly toward the environment and shows no sign of changing his ways. You could laugh at Pig-Pen. He was just a comic strip character. But Mr. Bush is no joke. His trashing of the environment is a deadly serious matter. E-mail: bobherb@nytimes. com

Despite heavy industry lobbying, California's Legislature approved a bill last week that for the first time would force automakers to limit emissions of carbon dioxide, the gas largely responsible for global warming. The bill is unquestionably the most important step taken in this country to control greenhouse emissions since 1998, when the Clinton administration signed the Kyoto Protocol, an agreement President Bush has since renounced. The bill contains no specific mandates beyond the model year (2009) when cleaner cars have to be on the road. Details will be worked out in negotiations between the companies and state regulatory authorities. Nevertheless, assuming Gov. Gray Davis signs the bill, as he apparently plans to do, it will inevitably drive Detroit and other automakers to manufacture more fuel-efficient vehicles. More broadly, the bill is a potentially monumental step in the war on warming -- cars and light trucks account for one-third of greenhouse gas emissions nationwide and 40 percent in California. It is also another reminder, if any were needed, of how sluggish the national government has been in addressing the threat of global climate change. Congress has refused to require any meaningful increase in fuel efficiency since the 1980's. On climate policy generally, Mr. Bush remains fixated on a voluntary approach that promises little hope of significant reductions in power plant and other industrial emissions of carbon dioxide. On the bright side, the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee last week approved a bill that would impose mandatory caps on carbon dioxide emissions and three other pollutants -- sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and mercury. Mandatory caps of some sort are necessary to contain the gradual -- and, if we wait too long, irreversible -- buildup of greenhouse gases in the earth's atmosphere. But the bill's margin of approval was razor-thin, and without a courageous conversion or two among prominent Republicans, it stands little chance in the Senate and even less in the House. One would have expected a greater sense of urgency. Less than a month ago we were treated to an authoritative interagency report, which Mr. Bush belittled, that reinforced earlier warnings from mainstream scientists that unchecked warming will bring devastating consequences, including rising seas, coastal flooding, disruption of snow-fed water supplies, heat waves and the disappearance of sensitive ecosystems like coral reefs. Then came a more narrowly focused but equally disturbing report by The Times's Timothy Egan about Alaska, where an astonishing seven-degree increase in average temperatures over 30 years has led to melting permafrost, sagging roads, dying forests, unexpected forest fires and disruption of marine life. Even Ted Stevens, the influential Republican senator from Alaska who usually has little patience with environmentalists, is openly alarmed about global warming's potential cost to his home state, an amount that could run into the billions of dollars, and is privately even more alarmed by Washington's indifference. It is in this depressing context that California's action is so welcome. The bill is designed to give the automakers great flexibility, and expressly rules out mandatory weight reductions and fuel taxes. Inevitably, though, the automakers will have to achieve fleetwide improvements in fuel economy, which means making more cars that emit less pollution by adding fuel-saving technologies like hybrid engines. California has long been more adventurous than even the federal government in pushing for cleaner cars, and over time this has benefited the nation as a whole because automakers have eventually decided to sell the cars they make for California in other markets. Once again, the country owes California a vote of thanks. Correction:  July 11, 2002, Thursday  A front-page article on June 16 about climate change in Alaska misstated the rise in temperatures there in the last 30 years. (The error was repeated in an editorial on Monday and in the Bob Herbert column on the Op-Ed page of June 24.) According to an assessment by the University of Alaska's Center for Global Change and Arctic System Research, the annual mean temperature has risen 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit over 30 years, not 7 degrees. Correction: July 11, 2002, ThursdayA front-page article on June 16 about climate change in Alaska misstated the rise in temperatures there in the last 30 years. (The error was repeated in an editorial on Monday and in the Bob Herbert column on the Op-Ed page of June 24.) According to an assessment by the University of Alaska's Center for Global Change and Arctic System Research, the annual mean temperature has risen 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit over 30 years, not 7 degrees.<br>

IT had to happen on the Upper West Side of Manhattan: drought-tolerant wedding bouquets.''I was out front watering our plants and people would walk by and yell at me for wasting water,'' Kevin Esteban said, standing at the door of Gotham Gardens, at 325 Amsterdam Avenue. ''It's the Upper West Side. They love a good cause.''Potted fig trees, Meyer lemons, hydrangeas, geraniums, lantana, heliotrope, sages and rosemary are only a few of the jungle of plants that make this storefront a green oasis. About a month ago, a call came from friends of a bride working for the World Wildlife Fund. ''Her friends wanted a politically correct bouquet,'' said Dan Dahl, who owns the business with Mr. Esteban. ''So we said, 'We'll use succulents.' ''The florists were already known around the neighborhood for their Eco-Kyoto bouquets, created after the United States refused to sign the Kyoto climate treaty, which would reduce the fuel-burning emissions blamed for global warming.''We wanted to do something besides being lazy-boy liberals,'' Mr. Esteban, 38, said. ''So we used plants native to countries that had signed the treaty.'' They had also given 20 percent of their profits -- the bouquets cost $125 -- to the World Wildlife Fund. So when friends of the bride needed flowers, they called Gotham Gardens. Now, Mr. Dahl, 43, stood in the back of the cool shop, assembling a bouquet of succulents, fuzzy lambs ears, hostas and other drought-tolerant plants. His nimble fingers worked with the fleshy stems of Lampranthus deltoides, a blue-gray succulent with fleshy, triangular leaves.''Deltoides means river delta,'' said Mr. Esteban, who loves studying the origins of words. ''It's triangular, like a delta.'' He made a triangle with his forefingers and thumbs. Mr. Dahl now added to the mix pale green velvety lamb's ears whose plump yellow flower buds were just beginning to open, and a bit of flowering dill. Hosta leaves, char treuse with dark green margins, were the perfect complement.''There's no right or wrong thing,'' said Mr. Dahl, who started out as a fashion designer. ''I like using herbs too, like rosemary or sage. The lavenders are also good. And I love using Gloriosa lilies.'' Their twisting yellow petals, edged with blood-red, dangled from a tall vase in the shop. There are many cut flowers, grasses and seed pods here to get you out of the box, so to speak, of routine flower arrangements. And for gardeners dealing with dry hot summers, which may be the future, the arrangements suggest generous plantings in the cutting garden. Red clover, for instance, looked beautiful in another bouquet. So did globe thistles, with their blue-gray thimble-shaped flowers, and tweedia, with its velvety triangular gray-green leaves and little pale blue-petaled flowers on leggy stems perfect for arching down from a hand or vase. All the artemisias are good, with their gray foliage, Mr. Esteban said. ''These bouquets are good for outdoor weddings, especially if it's a hot day,'' he said. ''They're not going to wilt on you.''He added: ''How many white bridal bouquets can you be excited about? Hah! No wonder they throw them over their shoulders.''Some plants make a statement on their own.''If I were down South, I would use a big yucca leaf,'' Mr. Esteban said. Californians have eucalpytus at their disposal. The green fuzzy pods looked great dangling over a big vase in the shop. The huge blue thistles of cardoon, which can grow to six feet in the garden, were riveting. So was a pot of nothing more than stems of artichokes -- though if I could grow them that big, I would eat them. One tall cylindrical vase had nothing but burgundy steel grass, four-feet sharp-edged blades that give it its nickname. My favorite was a wide glass container full of the fat curving stems of golden amaranth, hanging its tassles down like Rapunzel's long hair. It begged to be stroked.''We get it from California,'' Mr. Dahl said. But amaranth, native to Mexico and Central America, can easily be grown in the garden. I've grown mine 10 feet tall, and it doesnt mind water restrictions. Mr. Dahl, whose arrangements used to enliven the Guggenheim Museum, has a fondness for Echeveria elegans, too, that succulent with a wide rosette of pale green leaves, that sports an arching skinny stem with tiny pink flowers.''You can leave echeveria around for weeks, just set on a table, like an object,'' Mr. Esteban said. ''When the bottom leaves start to wither, I just pull them off.'' When he notices his rosettes need water, he floats them in a dish for a few hours, and they rejuvenate. You can also root succulents in a sandy medium, and if you have a sunny room that cools off at night, you can keep them growing year round. Let them thrive on the terrace in the summer, then bring them in before frost. I was thinking about these drought-tolerant bouquets a few days later, wandering the hot, dry borders of the Peconic River Herb Farm, in Calverton, N.Y. Dozens of prairie plants, herbs and grasses were doing just fine, without any supplemental watering. Agastache, goldenrod, yarrow, day lilies, santolina, rudbeckia, sunflowers, coreopsis, salvia, verbascum, coral bells, butterfly bush and vitex were all standing right up to the heat. The Asiatic lilies were just getting ready to bloom. So take the time, on the next 90-degree day, to go see what's doing just fine in the garden or down the street at your local ecologically minded florist shop. CUTTINGS

IT had to happen on the Upper West Side of Manhattan: drought-tolerant wedding bouquets.''I was out front watering our plants and people would walk by and yell at me for wasting water,'' Kevin Esteban said, standing at the door of Gotham Gardens, at 325 Amsterdam Avenue. ''It's the Upper West Side. They love a good cause.''Potted fig trees, Meyer lemons, hydrangeas, geraniums, lantana, heliotrope, sages and rosemary are only a few of the jungle of plants that make this storefront a green oasis. About a month ago, a call came from friends of a bride working for the World Wildlife Fund. ''Her friends wanted a politically correct bouquet,'' said Dan Dahl, who owns the business with Mr. Esteban. ''So we said, 'We'll use succulents.' ''The florists were already known around the neighborhood for their Eco-Kyoto bouquets, created after the United States refused to sign the Kyoto climate treaty, which would reduce the fuel-burning emissions blamed for global warming.''We wanted to do something besides being lazy-boy liberals,'' Mr. Esteban, 38, said. ''So we used plants native to countries that had signed the treaty.'' They had also given 20 percent of their profits -- the bouquets cost $125 -- to the World Wildlife Fund. So when friends of the bride needed flowers, they called Gotham Gardens. Now, Mr. Dahl, 43, stood in the back of the cool shop, assembling a bouquet of succulents, fuzzy lambs ears, hostas and other drought-tolerant plants. His nimble fingers worked with the fleshy stems of Lampranthus deltoides, a blue-gray succulent with fleshy, triangular leaves.''Deltoides means river delta,'' said Mr. Esteban, who loves studying the origins of words. ''It's triangular, like a delta.'' He made a triangle with his forefingers and thumbs. Mr. Dahl now added to the mix pale green velvety lamb's ears whose plump yellow flower buds were just beginning to open, and a bit of flowering dill. Hosta leaves, char treuse with dark green margins, were the perfect complement.''There's no right or wrong thing,'' said Mr. Dahl, who started out as a fashion designer. ''I like using herbs too, like rosemary or sage. The lavenders are also good. And I love using Gloriosa lilies.'' Their twisting yellow petals, edged with blood-red, dangled from a tall vase in the shop. There are many cut flowers, grasses and seed pods here to get you out of the box, so to speak, of routine flower arrangements. And for gardeners dealing with dry hot summers, which may be the future, the arrangements suggest generous plantings in the cutting garden. Red clover, for instance, looked beautiful in another bouquet. So did globe thistles, with their blue-gray thimble-shaped flowers, and tweedia, with its velvety triangular gray-green leaves and little pale blue-petaled flowers on leggy stems perfect for arching down from a hand or vase. All the artemisias are good, with their gray foliage, Mr. Esteban said. ''These bouquets are good for outdoor weddings, especially if it's a hot day,'' he said. ''They're not going to wilt on you.''He added: ''How many white bridal bouquets can you be excited about? Hah! No wonder they throw them over their shoulders.''Some plants make a statement on their own.''If I were down South, I would use a big yucca leaf,'' Mr. Esteban said. Californians have eucalpytus at their disposal. The green fuzzy pods looked great dangling over a big vase in the shop. The huge blue thistles of cardoon, which can grow to six feet in the garden, were riveting. So was a pot of nothing more than stems of artichokes -- though if I could grow them that big, I would eat them. One tall cylindrical vase had nothing but burgundy steel grass, four-feet sharp-edged blades that give it its nickname. My favorite was a wide glass container full of the fat curving stems of golden amaranth, hanging its tassles down like Rapunzel's long hair. It begged to be stroked.''We get it from California,'' Mr. Dahl said. But amaranth, native to Mexico and Central America, can easily be grown in the garden. I've grown mine 10 feet tall, and it doesnt mind water restrictions. Mr. Dahl, whose arrangements used to enliven the Guggenheim Museum, has a fondness for Echeveria elegans, too, that succulent with a wide rosette of pale green leaves, that sports an arching skinny stem with tiny pink flowers.''You can leave echeveria around for weeks, just set on a table, like an object,'' Mr. Esteban said. ''When the bottom leaves start to wither, I just pull them off.'' When he notices his rosettes need water, he floats them in a dish for a few hours, and they rejuvenate. You can also root succulents in a sandy medium, and if you have a sunny room that cools off at night, you can keep them growing year round. Let them thrive on the terrace in the summer, then bring them in before frost. I was thinking about these drought-tolerant bouquets a few days later, wandering the hot, dry borders of the Peconic River Herb Farm, in Calverton, N.Y. Dozens of prairie plants, herbs and grasses were doing just fine, without any supplemental watering. Agastache, goldenrod, yarrow, day lilies, santolina, rudbeckia, sunflowers, coreopsis, salvia, verbascum, coral bells, butterfly bush and vitex were all standing right up to the heat. The Asiatic lilies were just getting ready to bloom. So take the time, on the next 90-degree day, to go see what's doing just fine in the garden or down the street at your local ecologically minded florist shop. CUTTINGS

IT had to happen on the Upper West Side: drought-tolerant wedding bouquets.''I was out front watering our plants and people would walk by and yell at me for wasting water,'' Kevin Esteban said, standing at the door of Gotham Gardens, at 325 Amsterdam Avenue. ''It's the Upper West Side. They love a good cause.''Potted fig trees, Meyer lemons, hydrangeas, geraniums, lantana, heliotrope, sages and rosemary are only a few of the jungle of plants that make this storefront a green oasis. About a month ago, a call came from friends of a bride working for the World Wildlife Fund. ''Her friends wanted a politically correct bouquet,'' said Dan Dahl, who owns the business with Mr. Esteban. ''So we said, 'We'll use succulents.' ''The florists were already known around the neighborhood for their Eco-Kyoto bouquets, created after the United States refused to sign the Kyoto climate treaty, which would reduce the fuel-burning emissions blamed for global warming.''We wanted to do something besides being lazy-boy liberals,'' Mr. Esteban, 38, said. ''So we used plants native to countries that had signed the treaty.'' They had also given 20 percent of their profits -- the bouquets cost $125 -- to the World Wildlife Fund. So when friends of the bride needed flowers, they called Gotham Gardens. Now, Mr. Dahl, 43, stood in the back of the cool shop, assembling a bouquet of succulents, fuzzy lambs ears, hostas and other drought-tolerant plants. His nimble fingers worked with the fleshy stems of Lampranthus deltoides, a blue-gray succulent with fleshy, triangular leaves.''Deltoides means river delta,'' said Mr. Esteban, who loves studying the origins of words. ''It's triangular, like a delta.'' He made a triangle with his forefingers and thumbs. Mr. Dahl now added to the mix pale green velvety lamb's ears whose plump yellow flower buds were just beginning to open, and a bit of flowering dill. Hosta leaves, chartreuse with dark green margins, were the perfect complement.''There's no right or wrong thing,'' said Mr. Dahl, who started out as a fashion designer. ''I like using herbs too, like rosemary or sage. The lavenders are also good. And I love using Gloriosa lilies.'' Their twisting yellow petals, edged with blood-red, dangled from a tall vase in the shop. There are many cut flowers, grasses and seed pods here to get you out of the box, so to speak, of routine flower arrangements. And for gardeners dealing with dry hot summers, which may be the future, the arrangements suggest generous plantings in the cutting garden. Red clover, for instance, looked beautiful in another bouquet. So did globe thistles, with blue-gray thimble-shaped flowers, and tweedia, with velvety triangular gray-green leaves and little pale blue-petaled flowers on leggy stems perfect for arching down from a hand or vase. All the artemisias are good, with their gray foliage, Mr. Esteban said. ''These bouquets are good for outdoor weddings, especially if it's a hot day,'' he said. ''They're not going to wilt on you.''He added: ''How many white bridal bouquets can you be excited about? Hah! No wonder they throw them over their shoulders.''Some plants make a statement on their own.''If I were down South, I would use a big yucca leaf,'' Mr. Esteban said. Californians have eucalyptus at their disposal. The green fuzzy pods looked great dangling over a big vase in the shop. The huge blue thistles of cardoon, which can grow to six feet in the garden, were riveting. So was a pot of nothing more than stems of artichokes -- though if I could grow them that big, I would eat them. One tall cylindrical vase had nothing but burgundy steel grass, four-feet sharp-edged blades that give it its nickname. MY favorite was a wide glass container full of the fat curving stems of golden amaranth, hanging its tassels down like Rapunzel's long hair. It begged to be stroked.''We get it from California,'' Mr. Dahl said. But amaranth, native to Mexico and Central America, can easily be grown in the garden. I've grown mine 10 feet tall, and it doesn't mind water restrictions. Mr. Dahl, whose arrangements used to enliven the Guggenheim Museum, has a fondness for Echeveria elegans, too, that succulent with a wide rosette of pale green leaves, that sports an arching skinny stem with tiny pink flowers.''You can leave echeveria around for weeks, just set on a table,'' Mr. Esteban said. ''When the bottom leaves start to wither, I just pull them off.'' When his rosettes need water, he floats them in a dish a few hours, and they rejuvenate. You can also root succulents in a sandy medium, and if you have a sunny room that cools off at night, you can keep them growing year round. Let them thrive on the terrace in the summer, then bring them in before frost. I was thinking about these drought-tolerant bouquets a few days later, wandering the hot, dry borders of the Peconic River Herb Farm, in Calverton, N.Y. Dozens of prairie plants, herbs and grasses were doing just fine, without any supplemental watering. Agastache, goldenrod, yarrow, day lilies, santolina, rudbeckia, sunflowers, coreopsis, salvia, verbascum, coral bells, butterfly bush and vitex were all standing right up to the heat. The Asiatic lilies were just getting ready to bloom. So take the time, on the next 90-degree day, to go see what's doing just fine in the garden or down the street at your local ecologically minded florist shop. CUTTINGS

WHILE politicians and even chief executives make righteous speeches and advocate tougher penalties for corporate misdeeds, Sister Patricia Daly is smiling. For three decades, she has been quietly forcing changes her own way. Or perhaps not so quietly. Sister Daly, 45, a Dominican nun and member of the Interfaith Center for Corporate Responsibility, leads its efforts to make corporations more liable financially for damage to the environment and climate changes from global warming. Operating frequently from the group's headquarters on the Upper West Side in Manhattan, in a square building known as ''the God Box,'' Sister Daly spends her days meeting with corporate executives, drafting shareholder resolutions and trying to put pressure on large corporations like Exxon Mobil and General Electric. To Sister Daly, her activism is more than socially responsible investing or missionary work. ''Being a faithful member of a religious tradition doesn't always mean just showing up for services on a Saturday or Sunday,'' she said. ''It means being engaged.''Shareholder anger over scandals at Enron, Global Crossing, WorldCom, Adelphia Communications and the like have, in an odd way, been like manna from heaven for what she considers the broader cause of making corporations better citizens through shareholder activism. Not only were a record 721 shareholder resolutions filed this year, of which the Interfaith Center sponsored 144, but shareholders voted for them in record numbers. Sister Daly said she was particularly excited about gains made by resolutions that ask companies to report on their greenhouse gas emissions and what they are doing to curb them. An unprecedented 20 resolutions addressed climate change this year. More than 28 percent of shareholders at Eastman Chemical and 27 percent at American Standard supported them. At Exxon Mobil, 20 percent of shareholders voted in favor of two resolutions, one asking the company to reduce emissions and other to disclose the cost of delays in toxic chemical cleanups.; Sister Daly considered that a major victory. ''It's a real warning to them,'' she said. Although the resolutions did not pass, they will automatically remain on the annual-meeting agenda. Sister Daly's influence comes from the Interfaith Center's $110 billion in combined assets, mainly the pension funds of ministers, priests and nuns among its 275 religious organization members. The assets include substantial holdings in many large corporations. In the boom years, ''the treasury of my parish was certainly happy to see 25 percent returns,'' she said. But her attitude is that, as shareholders, ''we're part of the problem here.''Sister Daly views her work as following in the tradition of the Dominican order, founded in the 13th century by St. Dominic to fight heresies and untruths. ''We're dealing with some of the heresies and untruths of capitalism,'' Sister Daly said. But some critics say she has been too quick to accept environmentalist positions. ''I respect what the sister is doing because that is what she believes,'' said Frank Maisano, an energy consultant and former spokesman for the Global Climate Coalition, an energy industry group that disbanded after having successfully lobbied against Senate ratification of the Kyoto Protocol on greenhouse emissions. ''But I think she is somewhat misled at times by colleagues in the environmental community because they are somewhat less than honest about what industry is doing.''Others give grudging praise. ''Although we disagree with Sister Pat on her issues, she appears to be a dedicated activist and I'm sure we will have further discussions on Exxon Mobil's position,'' said Patrick Mulva, Exxon Mobil's vice president for investor relations. Sister Daly is known for tangling with chief executives at shareholder meetings. In an exchange with John F. Welch Jr. of General Electric in 1998, she challenged his resistance to taking responsibility for P.C.B. pollution from G.E. factories in New York's Hudson Valley. Sister Daly compared Mr. Welch's stance on P.C.B.'s -- chemicals also known as polychlorinated biphenyls -- to that of tobacco executives who once swore that cigarette smoke was harmless. Mr. Welch called Sister Daly's contention ''outrageous'' while she continued peppering him with well-informed questions until he abruptly moved on to the next agenda item -- a rare retreat for America's best-known corporate chief. Mr. Welch's office said he was on vacation and not available to comment.''C.E.O.'s sometimes have a difficult time dealing with Pat,'' said Seamus Finn, a colleague at the Interfaith Center. No chief executive is spared, even President Bush. Sister Daly described his recent speech criticizing Wall Street miscreants as ''without substance.''Timothy Smith, senior vice president and director for social responsibility at Walden Asset Management, a money management firm, said Sister Daly had an unusual ability to win allies from unlikely corners.''It takes a certain amount of skill to speak the language of different constituencies from Greenpeace to the State of New York to corporate boardrooms,'' Mr. Smith said. For example, Sister Daly met Bianca Jagger on the eve of a BP shareholder meeting in London and piqued her interest in organizing a boycott of Esso, a European subsidiary of Exxon Mobil, because of the company's position on global warming. Ms. Jagger then worked with Greenpeace on the Stop Esso campaign in Europe. Sister Daly grew up in Brooklyn and Queens and moved to Connecticut in her teens. She became a corporate activist in the 70's as a new member of the Sisters of Saint Dominic of Caldwell, N.J., campaigning against corporate labor practices and apartheid. ''When I entered, I knew nothing about being involved with corporations,'' she said. Mr. Smith of Walden recalled a shareholder meeting in the 1970's for J. P. Stevens, a textile company accused by organized labor of antiunion behavior. ''Pat was a novice. She appeared in full nun garb.''Private Sector

While automakers rail against landmark California legislation that would force them to cut greenhouse gas emissions by the end of the decade, they face a much more immediate challenge from the state. On Monday, Gov. Gray Davis of California will sign a bill requiring automakers to cut carbon dioxide emissions by the 2008 model year. The bill directs the California Air Resources Board to decide how much to reduce emissions over all and how to do it. But of more immediate concern for automakers is one of California's last big initiatives on air pollution -- a decade-old mandate to create zero-emission vehicles that could soon force them to sell more than 100,000 electric cars and other fuel-efficient vehicles in the state each year. Although the zero-emission standard, which was scheduled to take effect with the 2003 model year, has been delayed by a court injunction, it has prompted automakers to spend billions of dollars developing technologies to cut harmful tailpipe emissions and has led them to start promoting and selling electric vehicles. In addition, New York and Massachusetts plan versions of the Z.E.V. mandate, as it is known, meaning the zero-emissions requirement could cover almost one-fifth of the American auto market. Other states could follow suit. The mandate, set in motion in 1990, aims to cut emissions of nitrogen oxide and hydrocarbons, large contributors to smog, and particulates, which lead to respiratory ailments. But the mandate has been delayed by a legal challenge from General Motors and DaimlerChrysler, which won an injunction in federal court last month. State regulators have appealed and insist they will be able to tweak the regulation, if necessary, to mollify legal objections. The rule requires large automakers to derive 10 percent of sales from vehicles that produce nearly zero emissions, including at least 2 percent from vehicles with no emissions. Auto executives say that 2 percent requirement has forced them to keep alive a technology they would just as soon give up on: the battery-powered automobile, the only pure zero-emission vehicle now made. To comply, carmakers are already selling everything from armies of beefed-up golf carts to a few electric versions of sport utility vehicles to highly efficient versions of gas vehicles. Nissan is equipping most Sentra sedans sold in California with an extra catalytic converter. Toyota is advertising an electric version of its RAV4 sport utility vehicle on a billboard in Berkeley, at nearly double the normal price. Some executives worry that they will have to take additional steps to meet the mandate, like subsidizing sales of costly electric vehicles and spending thousands of dollars a vehicle to convert gas cars to electrics.''I remember I had a meeting in Tokyo where they showed me all the cost of this stuff. I said, 'Oh my God, the others have to do this too?' '' Carlos Ghosn, the chief executive of Nissan, said.''Nobody believes in it, but you have to do it,'' Mr. Ghosn said. ''It's a huge cost, but it's part of the cost of doing business.''California regulators, as well as environmental groups, counter that the rule has forced automakers to accelerate the development of cleaner technologies with sound prospects. These include hybrid engines, which run on both gasoline and electricity, as well as hydrogen fuel cells, a zero-emission technology widely considered as the power source of the future.''They wouldn't have been topics of discussion if not for Z.E.V.,'' said Jerry Martin, a spokesman for the California Air Resources Board, the regulatory body that established the mandate. ''The standard fare for drivers around the world would be 8,500-pound S.U.V.'s, probably half of them powered by diesel.'' The air resources board has also modified the regulation several times to give automakers credit for cars with low emissions. Many zero-emission vehicles in California are more golf cart than car and meant for gated communities, city-sponsored car sharing programs and corporate and government fleets. The Think division of Ford sells a beefed-up golf cart called the Neighbor for $6,500, which needs six to eight hours to recharge after traveling 30 miles. Ford is also considering bringing an electric subcompact sold in Europe, the Think City, to California. For a Think Neighbor ''we had a man trade in his Cadillac,'' said H. L. Fletcher, fleet manager of Fritts Ford in Riverside, Calif., who sells 40 to 50 Neighbors a month. Mr. Fletcher said the man, in his mid-80s, was ''too old to drive a big car and bought a Think to drive back and forth from the grocery store and get himself around.''But many car executives say the development of realistic technologies is being sacrificed for the money-losing, obsolete idea of electric cars. California has shown some flexibility, though. Nissan, for instance, has a varied compliance plan. It makes an electric station wagon, the Altra, that can travel 100 miles between charges and is being leased to power companies like Southern California Edison. It also makes a big golf cart, the Hypermini, that is being used in Pasadena and Palm Springs for parking enforcement. And Nissan will get credits for its modified Sentra. The most familiar vehicle is the electric version of Toyota's RAV4, which can go up to 78 miles an hour and travel up to 126 miles before it requires a recharge. The RAV4 EV sells for $42,510, versus a $17,000 starting price for a gasoline version, although it is eligible for $13,000 in state and federal rebates. Toyota has sold 120 since February. ''We lose large amounts of money on every EV we sell,'' said Mike Love, Toyota's national regulatory affairs manager. ''They cost us in excess of $100,000 apiece to build.''New York and Massachusetts have plans to adopt mandates that would give automakers until the 2006 model year before they have to produce any pure zero-emission vehicles. Until then, car companies could comply by selling hybrids, efficient gas cars or cars that use alternative fuels.''The small neighborhood-type vehicles really aren't as marketable here in the Northeast,'' said Gina McCarthy, assistant secretary for the environment in the Massachusetts executive office of environmental affairs. ''Residents in Massachusetts are really looking to get access to hybrids. They're buying them now, and they're on waiting lists. We want more hybrids.''Erin M. Crotty, the commissioner of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, said earlier this year that the state's Z.E.V. mandate will be a strong incentive for automakers. For the moment, though, both states are awaiting the outcome of the legal challenge in California. In 1990, when California's zero-emission mandate was formulated, there were hopes that the electric vehicle would be viable for the mass market by the end of the decade. But technology has still not solved the crucial drawbacks: short range and long charging time. G.M., now the most outspoken opponent of the Z.E.V. mandate, was a pioneer in electric vehicle development in the 1990's with its EV-1 sedan, spending more than $1 billion before abandoning it. G.M. plans to use credits from sales of the EV-1 to help meet the requirement, though it is not clear how it will comply if its legal challenge fails. Part of its plan, which has angered competitors, is to give away electric vehicles it has purchased from Club Car, a golf cart maker.''You don't mandate markets,'' said Chris Preuss, a G.M. spokesman. The Z.E.V. mandate, he added, was ''completely unworkable both in California and anywhere else.''The suit in federal court filed by G.M. and DaimlerChrysler, along with some state dealers, contends the mandate is superseded by federal fuel economy standards. Though reducing gas mileage is one way to cut harmful emissions, direct action on that is reserved for the federal government. A federal judge in Fresno granted the plaintiffs an injunction last month, saying the automakers had a strong case because of a 2001 amendment that gave credits for high-mileage vehicles. The air quality board, which at first threatened to enforce an older version of the regulation, has since appealed and says it will rewrite the mandate if necessary. Environmental groups say they have little choice but to turn California into a battleground. The auto industry has successfully lobbied since the 1980's to prevent significant increases in federal gas mileage standards, and the Bush administration rejected the Kyoto protocol, the international treaty to reduce global warming emissions. Since California's air quality regulations predate the federal Clean Air Act, it has its own, tougher rules, and other states can choose whether to follow them. The Z.E.V. rule was set in motion before global warming was a hot-button issue and was aimed at pollutants that lead to smog and other environmental hazards. Whether carbon dioxide, linked to global climate change, is itself a pollutant is a matter of much debate, but the Z.E.V. mandate will have the practical effect of curbing such emissions as well.''It forced the auto industry to evaluate and use technologies they never wanted to even look at,'' said Daniel Becker, director of global warming strategies at the Sierra Club, adding, ''As a direct result of that, we have hybrid electric vehicles on sale today.''

After a recent meeting, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was kidding around with the secretaries in the national security adviser's White House office, complaining that their pretzel jar was empty. Then he said: ''Okay, that's enough. I've got to get back to work now -- and by the way, I'm not resigning.''The staff ''all took a slight, shallow breath and then broke up,'' a senior administration official recalled. But the question of Secretary Powell's tenure is no laughing matter in Washington these days. A string of internal policy differences and defeats -- most recently on the Middle East and international family planning -- have set off speculation from the Pentagon to Foggy Bottom that Secretary Powell might not last through President Bush's term. Tensions with the White House and Pentagon hawks that Secretary Powell has long sought to minimize are no longer possible to disguise. In public, Secretary Powell, the four-star-general-turned-diplomat, has done what he always does: soldier on, shaping his commander's policies as best he can from within, with some success. In private, Secretary Powell, an amateur automotive mechanic, complains that old friends spend too much time sympathetically taking his temperature -- ''dip-sticking me,'' as he puts it.''He's not easily defeated,'' said Marybel Batjer, a former longtime aide who is now chief of staff to Gov. Kenny Guinn of Nevada and still in close touch. ''He just isn't. It's not within his constitution to be eaten up or gobbled up by negatives.'' But she acknowledged: ''Frankly, this is hard. His good weeks come with a lot of damn work.''With the possible exception of the moment in the mid-70's when Henry A. Kissinger was both secretary of state and national security adviser, internal tensions and threatened resignations over foreign policy have been more the rule than the exception in the modern White House. But veteran diplomats say the current disagreements are the worst since the days when Secretary Powell's mentor, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, feuded with Secretary of State George P. Shultz in the Reagan administration.''Since the administration can no longer maintain that these aren't major internal disagreements, they've decided they might as well try to contain them by saying that all administrations have disagreements,'' said Richard C. Holbrooke, the Clinton administration's envoy to the United Nations who aspired to Secretary Powell's job in a Gore administration.''The dilemma here is that these aren't just personal disagreements bred out of ambition and strong personality,'' he added. ''These are deep, philosophical differences between two very different views of America in the world. One is a traditional conservative view; the other is a radical break with 55 years of a bipartisan tradition that sought international agreements and regimes of benefit to us.''As one of the world's most admired celebrities for more than a decade, with approval ratings that rival President Bush's, Secretary Powell has special status -- and singular political value -- in a Republican administration supposedly eager to demonstrate its commitment to compassionate conservatism. But almost from the beginning, he has found himself at odds with many of his more hard-line colleagues and the president himself on the handling of foreign policy, whether over Mr. Bush's rejection of the Kyoto treaty on global warming, the president's lumping of Iran, Iraq and North Korea into a global ''axis of evil,'' or the president's declaration last month that progress toward Middle East peace depended on Yasir Arafat's replacement as Palestinian leader. In each case, Secretary Powell has embraced the president's position as his own, doing his best to justify the administration's view to often-critical allies around the world. Even when he has initially embraced a position at variance with the administration's ultimate policy -- regarding the international family planning issue, for example -- Secretary Powell's sense of discipline, loyalty and discretion means that he never shows his true feelings publicly, according to aides and close friends. Mr. Powell's approach to almost all issues -- foreign or domestic -- is pragmatic and nonideological. He is internationalist, multilateralist and moderate. He has supported abortion rights and affirmative action and is a Republican, many supporters say, in no small measure because Republican officials mentored and promoted him for years. Secretary Powell has won victories on points of principle that he felt deeply, persuading the administration that the Geneva Conventions governed the handling of captured Taliban fighters, even if they were not granted status as prisoners of war, and arguing successfully that a new arms reduction agreement with Russia should take the form of a treaty ratified by the Senate. But more often, he has been forced to ''pick up the pieces and go on,'' as one longtime Powell associate put it last month, after Mr. Bush announced his new Middle East policy. ''He's the one who now has to put it all together and make it work.''Last week, for example, he shepherded a series of meetings with key Arab allies, who arrived skeptical and left offering ringing declarations that Mr. Bush had reassured them of his administration's unshaken resolve to support creation of a Palestinian state within three years. Signaling a hint of compromise, Secretary Powell let it be known that he would be willing to consider a future Palestinian regime in which Mr. Arafat still had some symbolic role.''We have full trust in him,'' the Jordanian foreign minister, Marwan Muasher, said of Secretary Powell. ''The president made it clear that the secretary is his point man on the Middle East.''But on Monday, Secretary Powell again found himself in the position of announcing a Bush policy he had not initially embraced: the decision to cut off funds for the United Nations Population Fund on grounds that it supported Chinese government agencies that force women to have abortions. The State Department's fact-finding team had found no evidence of United Nations support for such efforts, and Democratic members of Congress said a top Powell aide had assured them he was trying to preserve such funding. This week, Secretary Powell heads off on a weeklong trip to keep up pressure on India and Pakistan to avert war, and consult with Southeast Asian nations fighting Muslim extremist groups and terror cells. Mr. Holbrooke gives Secretary Powell high praise for his efforts on the subcontinent and his influence on Pakistan's military president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf.''Powell and Musharraf have developed a relationship soldier to soldier, statesman to statesman, which is really important and has paid off by bringing Pakistan into the alliance against terrorism and preventing conflict with India, which would be the most dangerous conceivable event,'' he said. In foreign capitals, Secretary Powell is routinely greeted like a rock star. Yet his public visibility and popularity also pose a special problem, which became apparent even before he took office last year. By reputation, experience and age, he overshadowed the new president it was his job to serve. He did not join the Bush campaign as early as other key advisers like the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, and aides to both men say his relationship with the president remains more correct and professional than warm or personal. Secretary Powell does not lift weights or swap jock jokes easily with Mr. Bush. At the same time, Mr. Bush's instinctive views on a range of policies from Iraq to the Middle East to international cooperation are more in line with more conservative advisers like Vice President Dick Cheney and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld. And if Mr. Bush is aware of Secretary Powell's world reputation, Mr. Rumsfeld surely remembers that he was already serving in his first tour as defense secretary 25 years ago when Secretary Powell shook his hand as a lean Army colonel in command at Fort Campbell, Ky., an event that Secretary Powell commemorated with a photograph in his best-selling 1995 memoir. A senior State Department official, asked about the secretary's mood, observed: ''I was going to describe it as depressed with all his failures, but let me put it differently: His virtues are vision and persistence. He figures out where we need to go and then he gets us there, and that applies in his dealings with others in the administration or in the world.''Secretary Powell himself has told associates that his position has never been stronger, one said, summing up the secretary's philosophy as: ''Fights come and fights go.''Indeed, Secretary Powell's greatest resource may remain the admiration bordering on awe that he commands from his striped pants civilian army. He never complains, never explains, and neither does his circle -- an approach that for much of his tenure has tended to mask tensions that would be much more on display with a more political secretary. He has taken to arriving at the State Department's main entrance most mornings -- instead of being chauffeured through the basement garage -- so that he can take the pulse of employees and the public in the lobby on the way to his seventh-floor suite.''He's adored over here in a way that I can't remember with any other secretary,'' one midlevel State Department official said. ''People will snip out quotes that he uses up on the Hill to advocate for the department or foreign policy and circulate them around.''In fact, there is such support for the secretary among his troops that when the assistant secretary of state for consular affairs, Mary A. Ryan, abruptly retired amid sharp criticism of lapses in the department's visa program, ''the rumor was going around here that the White House had done it because Powell was too nice a guy,'' one senior official said. So Secretary Powell made it a point to tell colleagues that he had made the decision to accept Ms. Ryan's previously promised retirement in light of the challenges to come in integrating the visa-issuing function with a new department of homeland security. ''He went out of his way to tell people, 'I'm the one who did it,' '' the official said. Edward S. Walker, a former assistant secretary of state who now heads the Middle East Institute, a Washington policy institute, said Secretary Powell ''is extremely loyal to the president, but he does not give up on his own approach.''It's the way he is. He after all has as much experience at the Washington game as anyone. I know a lot of people question his effectiveness, but he's a very effective advocate for his point of view, and he just never gives up.''In fact, most Powell-watchers doubt that the secretary will give up. Friends say that he has been deeply moved by letters from strangers, urging him to keep up his efforts as a moderating voice. He is also acutely conscious of his own status as a role model for members of minority groups, and has made special efforts to try to recruit more to join the Foreign Service. At a recent ceremony announcing a $1 million grant to Howard University to help prepare black students for diplomatic careers, he spoke of his own pride as the first African-American to hold a string of top government jobs. ''It's just terrific to be able to walk into a room somewhere in Africa, Russia and Asia and Europe, and you know they're looking at you,'' he said, adding to laughter: ''You know how they be. They're looking at you, and they recognize your position and who you are, and they also recognize that you're black.''And it's always a source of inspiration and joy to see people look at me and through me see my country, and see what promise my country offers to all people who come to these shores looking for a better life.''

GLOBAL warming has been on the agenda of environmental activists for years. But it is also becoming a green issue of another kind -- discussed not only in terms of melting ice caps and endangered species, but as a problem that can cost corporations and their investors billions of dollars. With their confidence shaken in corporate bookkeeping and the market's omniscience, investors are starting to look for other possible ''off balance sheet'' land mines, including the hidden risks that could be associated with global climate change. A scientific consensus has formed that greenhouse gases -- carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping emissions released by automobiles, power plants and industrial factories -- are causing the average temperature to increase, setting off environmental reactions ranging from rising water levels to droughts. Losses from global warming were in evidence just this past week. A report released last Monday by the United Nations predicted that a two-mile-thick layer of brown haze blanketing Asia, caused in part by greenhouse gases, could severely cut rainfall and reduce India's rice harvest by 10 percent. And abnormally high temperatures in Eastern Europe have been partly blamed for the severe floods ravaging Prague and other beacons of European architecture. Munich Re, a large German insurance company, estimates that global warming could cost $300 billion annually by 2050 in weather damage, pollution, industrial and agricultural losses and other expenses. Companies may also face unexpected expenses because of compliance with future regulations, fines, taxes and caps on products that produce greenhouse gases. The impact of climate change varies by sector. Oil, gas and utilities, of course, are directly affected by changes in energy policy, while real estate is affected by coastal flooding and drought. But environmental activists and a growing number of investors have started to catch the corporate world's attention with their warnings that nearly all industries are exposed to some risk. Of particular concern are the costs of complying with a patchwork of regulations in the United States and abroad and the potential harm to a company's reputation if it is contributing to global warming. In another ominous sign for chief executives and board members, some experts in corporate governance say company officers could be held accountable for failing to protect their companies from climate-related risk. And the lawsuits could come from governments as well as investors and other aggrieved parties. Peter Lehner, chief of the New York attorney general's Environmental Protection Bureau, said it was studying the issue of climate change and might sue polluters along the lines of the successful tobacco litigation by states in the 1990's. YET most of the risks and potential costs go unreported. Although Securities and Exchange Commission rules require companies to disclose trends and uncertainties that could affect their stocks, few specific provisions exist for disclosing environmental liabilities. Critics say that even those regulations are barely enforced and that financial analysts rarely take such risks into account when assessing companies. It's not necessarily deliberate. In many cases, companies are unsure how to calculate potential liabilities -- especially when regulations have yet to be written. Because global warming is a long-term trend, it does not fit neatly into the quarterly reporting schedule or the outlook of many executives. Still, many investors are taking such omissions seriously. ''There was an assumption that everything important was valued by the market,'' said Robert K. Massie, executive director at the Coalition of Environmentally Responsible Economies, an association of environmental and investor groups that is based in Boston. ''We know now that investors can be unaware of something with big impact.''Robert Monks, chairman of LENS Investment management and Ram Trust Services, and a longtime corporate governance activist, said companies need disclosure guidelines for environmental liability because ''the market can't reflect something it doesn't know.''Mr. Monks was behind a shareholder resolution this year aimed at reducing the duties of Lee Raymond, chairman and chief executive of Exxon Mobil, to mitigate what Mr. Monks saw as the damaging effects of Mr. Raymond's rigid view that global warming was not a problem for the company. The resolution got 20 percent of the vote, considered surprisingly strong. The issue of executive and director liability is likely to be closely watched. Shareholder activists ''are creating a record of these companies' being put on notice,'' said Christopher Walker, managing director of a group that assesses the insurance risks of greenhouse gases at the New York offices of Swiss Re, a large insurer. ''Our concern is, will there be a shareholder action 5 or 10 years from now?'' In particular, he said, emissions reduction is shaping up as a ''clear liability issue'' for corporate managements and boards. Swiss Re is reviewing the companies it insures to determine what they are doing to manage climate change risk, he said, and is considering excluding from coverage companies or directors that are not addressing it. Some companies, like DuPont, BP and Ford, have addressed risk from climate change in their annual reports and S.E.C. filings. In its 2001 annual report to the S.E.C., for example, DuPont acknowledged the possible consequences of the Kyoto treaty on greenhouse emissions. Although not ratified by the United States, the treaty will limit gases like carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide, which DuPont produces in chemical manufacturing. DuPont's report said it has been reducing these emissions since 1991, yet may still face further restrictions in some countries. IN contrast, Dow Chemical, a competitor, does not mention climate change or greenhouse gas emissions in its 2001 annual report to the S.E.C.''We're going to be saying more about climate change,'' said Peter Molinari, a Dow executive who monitors climate change and the company's greenhouse gas emissions. For example, a social responsibility report to be released by Dow in September will chart its greenhouse gas emission reductions (15 percent since 1995) for the first time, Mr. Molinari said. Advocates of more disclosure say that in lieu of hard numbers, even qualitative assessments are helpful. Pressure for such assessments has been growing. Shareholder resolutions that ask companies to disclose or reduce greenhouse gas emissions won an unexpectedly high 30 percent of the vote at some companies during the 2002 annual meeting season. Law firms and insurance companies are setting up business units to deal with climate-related risks. And more institutional investors are lobbying the S.E.C. and companies for better disclosure of environmental risks, particularly those related to climate change.''People are recognizing that it's an issue they are going to have to deal with,'' said Tracey Mihelic, a partner at the Baker & McKenzie law firm in Chicago and a member of its new practice dealing with energy and climate-change litigation. Tim Little, executive director of the Rose Foundation for Communities and the Environment, a shareholder advocacy group based in Oakland, Calif., that has been campaigning for clearer guidelines on environmental reporting, said, ''We see environmental disclosure as the next big corporate accounting scandal out there.''A report being drafted by the foundation predicted shareholder losses from ''fines, penalties, and cleanup costs due to violation of environmental laws, increased costs due to changes in environmental regulation, and greater-than-expected costs due to understated or undisclosed liabilities.''Innovest Strategic Value Advisors, based in New York, estimates that as much as 15 percent of the total market capitalization of major companies may be put at risk by climate change. A report in July by the World Resource Institute, an environmental research group, said shareholders in leading oil and gas companies could lose 6 percent or more of the value of their investments because of regulatory and other efforts to curb climate change. Of the 17 companies studied, only three -- British Petroleum, Conoco and Phillips Petroleum -- mentioned in their annual reports that climate policies and regulations could affect future business operations. Big names are behind some of the campaigns. In May, Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors in New York organized the Carbon Disclosure Project, a petition supported by institutional investors representing $4 trillion in assets from Credit Suisse, Domini, Merrill Lynch Investment Managers and UBS Global Asset Management, among others. The investors wrote to 500 large corporations asking them to quantify their greenhouse gas emissions and plans for reducing them. For many corporations, the process of even starting to calculate liability is difficult, because liability is contingent on future regulations. In addition, a single company can have several areas of seemingly insignificant risk that become significant when added up.''How do you know what your risk is when the rules are not yet established?'' said Ms. Mihelic of Baker & McKenzie. She said that if companies take action before regulations are in place -- say, building a more efficient plant -- those actions may not count toward credits when regulations are written years later.''If I'm a board of directors, am I going to spend $100 million?'' she asked. ''If I address it now, are you going to sue me for addressing it too soon?''Nonetheless, she said, ''every company is discussing this, whether or not they are saying it's an issue.''

Dozens of international accords aimed at protecting the environment have been enacted in recent decades. Dozens of international accords aimed at protecting the environment have been enacted in recent decades. Some are fine-tuned, like an agreement adopted last year to save albatrosses and petrels. Others are as broad as the atmosphere, including treaties that ban ozone-destroying chemicals. At the World Summit on Sustainable Development, which starts on Monday in Johannesburg, world leaders will negotiate a declaration of new goals for this century but will not produce any formal treaty. Following are major recent environmental treaties.2001 STOCKHOLM CONVENTION ON PERSISTENT ORGANIC POLLUTANTS -- Signed by the United States and most other countries last year, this convention, once it takes effect, will phase out the ''dirty dozen,'' a group of harmful, long-lived organic compounds, including DDT and dioxins.1997 KYOTO PROTOCOL -- The Kyoto climate treaty requires 38 industrial nations by 2012 to cut releases of heat-trapping greenhouse gases below 1990 levels. It was signed during the Clinton administration but rejected last year by President Bush. It serves as a rider to the Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was adopted at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro a decade ago. The Kyoto accord has been ratified by Europe, Japan and many other countries. It still requires ratification by Russia, possibly by next year, to enter into force in the nations that endorse it.1992 FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE -- This agreement, signed by the United States and almost all other countries, took effect in 1994. But it called only for voluntary measures to reduce industrial-country emissions by 2000 to 1990 levels. The measures did not work. Global emissions rose 10 percent in that span, and American emissions rose 16 percent.1992 CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY -- Adopted at the Rio summit, this treaty, which took effect in 1993, gives countries legal control of their biological resources and the right to share in profits should they be developed into drugs or other valuable products. But conservationists have recently criticized the agreement for failing to spur more preservation of threatened ecosystems.1987 MONTREAL PROTOCOL ON SUBSTANCES THAT DEPLETE THE OZONE LAYER -- This agreement, signed and ratified by most countries, including the United States, was enacted in 1989. It updated an earlier treaty, the 1985 Vienna Convention on the ozone layer. The Montreal pact sharply limits production of chlorofluorocarbons and other substances that destroy the beneficial veil of ozone in the upper atmosphere, which blocks most of the sun's harmful ultraviolet radiation. The protocol is widely judged to have worked well. Levels of the harmful compounds have plunged, and the ozone layer is predicted to rebuild within 50 years or so. But the agreement's success occurred, in large part, because substitutes for the harmful chemicals were readily available and the problem was made vividly clear by satellite measurements. MANAGING PLANET EARTH

With the American president a conspicuous exception, leaders from nearly 100 nations will begin assembling next week in Johannesburg to address the future of life on this planet. At the heart of the conference is a formidable if now familiar challenge -- figuring out ways to bring economic well-being to billions of people now trapped in poverty without destroying the land, water, air and biodiversity required to sustain life itself. It will be the third such meeting in three decades, and if the past is any guide, the Johannesburg conclave -- known formally as the World Summit on Sustainable Development -- will be long on good intentions and short on specific solutions. Even so, it is a meeting well worth having. The Stockholm summit in 1972 inspired the industrialized nations to begin cleaning up their air and water. The Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 produced treaties on global warming and biodiversity that, while vague, officially committed at least the industrialized nations to address two major environmental threats that had long gone unattended. In the last decade these challenges have not receded, while others have arisen. President Bush's absence is regrettable, and reinforces his well-deserved reputation -- flowing in part from his rejection of the Kyoto Protocol on global warming -- for indifference to environmental problems and reflexive hostility to multilateral remedies. If anyone can dispel that impression, however, it is Secretary of State Colin Powell, who will lead the American delegation. Though his visit will be brief, Mr. Powell at least shares the view that environmental degradation and poverty can destabilize nations as surely as actual warfare. There is little doubt that current patterns of development are unsustainable over the long term. As the U.N. secretary general, Kofi Annan, recently observed, fish stocks continue to shrink, tropical rain forests (and associated species) continue to recede, and agricultural productivity declines while the number of mouths to feed grows. In 25 years, two-thirds of the world may be living without enough water. Meanwhile, use of fossil fuels means increased global warming. Millions die every year from tropical diseases, waterborne germs and parasites and the pollution that results from the unshielded indoor combustion of primitive fuels. Eliminating these diseases must be part of any development program. Sustainable development may mean higher short-run costs. It can also generate longer-range savings. The Times has reported a large German insurance company's estimate that the consequences of global warming will cost as much as $300 billion annually by 2050. Health problems arising from poor sanitation, habitat destruction and loss of biodiversity also carry a high economic price. For these and other reasons, the conference's organizers have rejected the notion that nations must choose between economic growth and environmental protection. Both are indispensable. Mr. Bush's opposition to Kyoto means that global warming will not get the attention it did 10 years ago in Rio. However, Secretary Powell has generally expressed support for Mr. Annan's agenda, and is expected to announce a package of health, environmental and food programs aimed at helping Africa after he arrives. In the conference's aftermath, he needs to go further and lead an effort to reconfigure American foreign aid as a whole to underwrite sustainable development.

With the opening today of the United Nations World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg, we will be hearing a great deal about both concepts: sustainability and development. Traditionally, the developed nations of the West have shown greater concern for environmental sustainability, while third world countries have a stronger desire for economic development. At big environmental gatherings, it is usually the priorities of the first world that carry the day. The challenge in Johannesburg will be whether we can put development ahead of sustainability. If the United States leads the way, the world may finally find the courage to do so. Why does the developed world worry so much about sustainability? Because we constantly hear a litany of how the environment is in poor shape. Natural resources are running out. The population is growing, leaving less and less to eat. Species are becoming extinct in vast numbers. Forests are disappearing. The planet's air and water are getting ever more polluted. Human activity is, in short, defiling the earth -- and as it does so, humanity may end up killing itself. There is, however, one problem: this litany is not supported by the evidence. Energy and other natural resources have become more abundant, not less so. More food is now produced per capita than at any time in the world's history. Fewer people are starving. Species are, it is true, becoming extinct. But only about 0.7 percent of them are expected to disappear in the next 50 years, not the 20 percent to 50 percent that some have predicted. Most forms of environmental pollution look as though they have either been exaggerated or are transient -- associated with the early phases of industrialization. They are best cured not by restricting economic growth but by accelerating it. That we in the West are so willing to believe the litany despite the overwhelming evidence to the contrary results in an excessive focus on sustainability. Nowhere is this more pronounced than in the discussion on global warming. There is no doubt that pumping out carbon dioxide from fossil fuels has increased the global temperature. Yet too much of the debate is fixated on reducing emissions without regard to cost. With its agreement to the 1997 Kyoto climate treaty, Europe has set itself the goal of cutting its carbon emissions to 1990 levels by 2012. Even with renewable sources of energy taking over, the United Nations Climate Panel still estimates a temperature increase of four degrees to five degrees Fahrenheit by the year 2100. Such a rise is projected to have less impact in industrialized nations than in developing countries, which tend to be in warmer regions and have infrastructures less able to withstand the inevitable problems. Despite our intuition that we need to do something drastic about global warming, economic analyses show that it will be far more expensive to cut carbon dioxide emissions radically than to pay the costs of adapting to the increased temperatures. Moreover, all current models show that the Kyoto Protocol will have surprisingly little impact on the climate: temperature levels projected for 2100 will be postponed for all of six years. Yet the cost of meeting the Kyoto Protocol will be $150 billion to $350 billion annually (compared to $50 billion in global annual development aid). With global warming disproportionately affecting third world countries, we have to ask if Kyoto is the best way to help them. The answer is no. For the cost of Kyoto for just one year we could solve the world's biggest problem: we could provide every person in the world with clean water. This alone would save two million lives each year and prevent 500 million people from contracting severe disease. In fact, for the same amount Kyoto would have cost just the United States every year, the United Nations estimates that we could provide every person in the world with access to basic health, education, family planning and water and sanitation services. Isn't this a better way of serving the world? The focus should be on development, not sustainability. Development is not simply valuable in itself, but in the long run it will lead the third world to become more concerned about the environment. Only when people are rich enough to feed themselves do they begin to think about the effect of their actions on the world around them and on future generations. With its focus on sustainability, the developed world ends up prioritizing the future at the expense of the present. In contrast, a focus on development helps people today while creating the foundation for an even better tomorrow. The United States has a unique opportunity in Johannesburg to call attention to development. Many Europeans chastised the the Bush administration for not caring enough about sustainability, especially in its rejection of the Kyoto Protocol. They are probably correct that the American decision was made on the basis of economic self-interest rather than out of some principled belief in world development. But in Johannesburg the administration can recast its decision as an attempt to focus on the most important and fundamental issues on the global agenda: clean drinking water, better sanitation and health care and the fight against poverty. Such a move would regain for the United States the moral high ground. When the United States rejected the Kyoto treaty last year, Europeans talked endlessly about how it was left to them to ''save the world.'' But if the United States is willing to commit the resources to ensure development, it could emerge as the savior. Bjorn Lomborg is director of the Environmental Assessment Institute in Denmark and author of ''The Skeptical Environmentalist.''

Tens of thousands of officials, environmentalists and advocates for the poor converged on this old mining city today to devise an ambitious blueprint to promote development while protecting natural resources. Participants from all over the world flocked to the United Nations' World Summit on Sustainable Development in flowing African robes, Indian saris and pinstriped suits. They celebrated the spirit of global solidarity and vowed to hammer out a plan to protect rain forests, to clean polluted air and to help millions of people escape from poverty. More than 100 presidents and prime ministers, including most European leaders, will attend this summit meeting to show their commitment to their new pledges. But many here are expressing doubts about the developed nations' sincerity and are especially critical of the fact that President Bush, the leader of the world's biggest economy and its largest polluter, has decided not to attend. American officials here today said they were committed to the meeting's agenda and would soon announce investments of more than $970 million in projects to provide access clean water to Africa and other developing nations. They said they want to focus on offering concrete support for specific projects instead of getting mired in debates about the targets and time frames for foreign aid that the developing nations are seeking. But as participants gathered in the gleaming convention center here, nearly everyone was haunted by the failures of the past. Ten years ago, the world's leaders left the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro with an ambitious agenda that is mostly remembered by the participants here as a string of broken promises and squandered opportunities. In his opening speech today, President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa said pointedly that the world had stood by and allowed environmental degradation and deepening poverty to threaten the future of the Earth. Mr. Mbeki said leaders had failed to muster the political will to reduce poverty and to protect natural resources despite the promises made in Rio de Janeiro. He urged officials to develop a plan during this 10-day meeting to rescue a world increasingly characterized by dying lakes, retreating forests, global warming and desperately poor people.''Poverty, underdevelopment, inequality within and among countries, together with the worsening global ecological crisis, sum up the dark shadow under which most of the world lives,'' Mr. Mbeki said in his speech. ''It is no secret that the global community has, as yet, not demonstrated the will to implement the decisions it has freely adopted.''''We need to take stock of the inertia of the past decade and agree on very clear and practical measures that will help us to deal decisively with all the challenges that we face,'' he added. ''This is the central task of this summit.''The officials here applauded his words. But as the day wore on and negotiators huddled in the ballrooms, it was clear that coming up with a strong plan would be very difficult. No new treaties will be signed here. Instead, negotiators are focusing on the link between poverty and environmental degradation and on how to spur growth in poor countries while protecting the environment. But there are deep disagreements between rich and poor nations about how to achieve those goals. Poor countries say they need to improve their economies before they will be in a position to protect their natural resources. They want wealthy nations to provide aid to developing countries equal to 0.7 percent of the wealthy nations' gross national products. They also want the wealthy nations to reduce or eliminate tariffs on agricultural goods from poor countries and, by 2015, to reduce by half the number of people who lack access to sanitation. Officials from the United States and the European Union have refused to make commitments for time frames to eliminate agricultural subsidies, which protect their farmers from foreign competition. ''We do not see Johannesburg as a place to have these negotiations,'' said Catherine Day of the European Union at a news conference today. The European Union is willing to discuss setting targets for increasing foreign assistance to the poor and for converting to renewable energy sources, but the United States opposes such measures.''I think goals are important, but they're only lofty rhetoric without the commitment of resources,'' said John F. Turner, the assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs.''The opportunity here is for partners to start committing resources in these critical areas to reduce poverty and ensure a more sustainable future,'' Mr. Turner said. ''That's what we ought to be focused on.''But officials from developing nations said the wealthy countries were being inflexible. ''What's in there for us?'' asked one official, who supports specific targets for foreign aid. ''We're not advancing at all.''Nearly 25 percent of the summit meeting's action plan remained contested today. As diplomats scrambled for consensus, some officials warned that the meeting might produce little more than reaffirmations of old promises. Environmentalists and advocates for the poor are already vowing to march through the streets by the thousands on Saturday to ensure that the link between poverty and environmental decay remains high on the agenda. Much of their anger is directed at President Bush. Last year, President Bush upset many leaders when he rejected a treaty negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, which set targets for reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. Marcel Furtado, a Brazilian representative of the advocacy group Greenpeace, said both developing and developed countries were to blame for the failure of pledges made in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. Mr. Furtado said many delegates had learned from the failures of the past. He said they resented the United States and the European Union, to some extent, for blocking efforts to infuse this meeting's action plan with new and concrete commitments. ''We have a job to do, which is to deliver change,'' he said. ''It looks like the real issues are not making it into the document.''Klaus Toepfer, the executive director of the United Nations Environment Program, urged negotiators to strive for consensus, no matter how difficult the negotiations become. No one, he said, can afford to give up.''The eyes of the world are upon us here waiting for signs that we are able to bridge our differences,'' he said. ''The time has come to translate our political commitment into action.''

At present there is much talk about the unparalleled strength of the United States on the world stage. Yet at this very moment the most powerful country in the world stands to forfeit much political capital, moral authority and international good will by dragging its feet on the next great global issue: the environment. Before long, the administration's apparent unwillingness to take a leadership role -- or, at the very least, to stop acting as a brake -- in fighting global environmental degradation will threaten the very basis of the American supremacy that many now seem to assume will last forever. American authority is already in some danger as a result of the Bush administration's decision to send a low-level delegation to the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg -- low-level, that is, relative to America's share of both the world economy and global pollution. The absence of President Bush from Johannesburg symbolizes this decline in authority. In recent weeks, newspapers around the world have been dominated by environmental headlines: In central Europe, flooding killed dozens, displaced tens of thousands and caused billions of dollars in damages. In South Asia, the United Nations reports a brown cloud of pollution that is responsible for hundreds of thousands of deaths a year from respiratory disease. The pollution (80 percent man-made) also cuts sunlight penetration, thus reducing rainfall, affecting agriculture and otherwise altering the climate. Many other examples of environmental degradation, often related to the warming of the atmosphere, could be cited. What they all have in common is that they severely affect countries around the world and are fast becoming a chief concern for people everywhere. Nobody is suggesting that these disasters are directly linked to anything the United States is doing. But when a country that emits 25 percent of the world's greenhouse gases acts as an uninterested, sometimes hostile bystander in the environmental debate, it looks like unbearable arrogance to many people abroad. The administration seems to believe it is merely an observer -- that environmental issues are not its issues. But not doing anything amounts to ignoring a key source of world tension, and no superpower that wants to preserve its status can go on dismissing such a pivotal dimension of political and economic -- if not existential -- conflict. In my view, there is a clear-cut price to be paid for ignoring the views of just about every other country in the world today. The United States is jettisoning its hard-won moral and intellectual authority and perhaps the strategic advantages that come with being a good steward of the international political order. The United States may no longer be viewed as a leader or reliable partner in policymaking: necessary, perhaps inevitable, but not desirable, as it has been for decades. All of this because America's current leaders are not willing to acknowledge the very real concerns of many people about global environmental issues. No one can expect the United States to provide any quick fixes, but one would like to see America make a credible and sustained effort, along with other countries, to address global environmental problems. This should happen on two fronts. The first is at home in the United States, through more environmentally friendly policies, for example greater fuel-efficiency standards for cars and light trucks and better insulation for buildings. The second is international, through a more cooperative approach to multilateral attempts at safeguarding the environment. Simply rejecting international treaties (like the Kyoto Protocol) then failing to offer a better proposal cannot be an acceptable option for American policymakers. Much of the world has come together to help the United States in the fight against terrorism, out of the realization that a common threat can only be beaten through a cooperative effort. It is high time for the United States, metaphorically speaking, to get out of its oversized, gas-guzzling S.U.V. -- and join the rest of the world in doing more to combat global warming and protecting the planet. Norbert Walter is chief economist at Deutsche Bank Group.

The photograph appears in a full-page advertisement in The International Herald Tribune under the headline ''Put a Face on Global Warming and Forest Destruction.''It is a picture of President Bush, whose country is accused by protesters and some delegates at an international conference here of derailing any hope of progress at the talks to reduce poverty and protect the environment.''Corporate criminals!'' the protesters shout as they assail American officials for opposing targets and deadlines intended to promote development while preserving the environment. But in the private negotiating rooms at the United Nations World Summit on Sustainable Development here, the United States is far from the only country balking at approving a strong, ambitious agreement. Saudi Arabia, Canada, Japan and Australia, for instance, also oppose deadlines for the conversion from oil and gas power to windmills, solar panels and other forms of renewable energy. The European Union objects to eliminating subsidies for activities that threaten natural resources, like commercial fishing. Developing countries have joined the United States in pressing to water down language that would have committed nations to significantly reducing the threat that dangerous chemicals pose to health and the environment. The large number of countries opposed to various targets and time frames is the main reason why negotiators have struggled this week to complete the summit meeting's plan, which is meant to be an ambitious blueprint for the world. On one hand, the United States has been almost alone in refusing to support an agreement to reduce the number of people who lack sanitation by half by 2015. Australia also opposes that time frame. But on the other hand, the American decision to accept timetables for restoring depleted fisheries and for reducing the risk of hazardous chemicals has been nearly lost in the storm of criticism.''The situation has been very polarized, but it's not a matter of singling out one country,'' said Gustavo Ainchil, the diplomat from Argentina who is leading the negotiations on energy. ''You cannot simplify a problem that is very complex.''Everyone here supports the summit meeting's overall goals of protecting plants and wildlife, reducing pollution and bringing water, electricity and housing to the poor. But poor nations object to environmental targets or strong language that would require costly intervention on their part. Wealthy nations refuse to budge on subsidies that protect their industries. Oil producers are reluctant to embrace commitments that promote alternative energy sources. Other countries, in many cases, view the deadlines as unnecessary regulation. The result is that the plan, which officials hoped would be completed tonight, is still incomplete, with deadlocks on issues ranging from subsidies to renewable energy and from corporate accountability to globalization. Washington has borne the brunt of the blame for the delay. The United States has the world's largest economy and is one of its largest polluters. Many leaders complain that it has been reluctant to eliminate the agricultural subsidies that make it difficult for poor nations to export to the American market. Other officials complain that it has failed to acknowledge and accept its obligations for cleaning up the environment. Last year, Mr. Bush angered many leaders when he rejected a treaty negotiated in Kyoto, Japan, that set targets for reducing emissions of gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. Mr. Bush said such accords should also bind developing nations, especially China and India, that are also major emitters of such gases. Developing nations have refused, saying wealthy countries are among the largest polluters and should clean up first. The European Union, which wants to set deadlines for resolving environmental problems, has been sharply critical of Washington's reluctance to make commitments to such agreements.''On targets and timetables on the environmental issues, we haven't seen a concrete proposal, nothing at all except watering down the text, avoiding anything concrete,'' said Jos Delbeke, a senior member of the European delegation. ''We cannot understand why the United States, being a world leader, is taking such a harsh stance.''Environmentalists agreed, saying the United States deserved the criticism because it had objected to so many critical aspects of the summit meeting's plan, including time frames for converting to renewable energy and for reversing the decline of endangered plants and animals. Among the critics is the Rainforest Action Network, the advocacy group that placed the advertisement in The International Herald Tribune.''Any progress is welcome,'' Paul L. Joffe, the director of international affairs for the National Wildlife Federation, said of the American agreement on fisheries and chemicals. ''But what we've seen so far is very minimal compared to the enormous challenges here and the enormous lack of commitment to goals, timetables and funding.''But United Nations officials described the American concessions on fisheries and chemicals as significant. The Americans have agreed to restore depleted fisheries, where possible, by 2015, and to make commitments for sound management of chemicals with the goal of minimizing their adverse effects on health and nature by 2020. Environmental groups complain that the wording is weak. But some officials warn that the intense criticism of the Americans has given a distorted picture of the negotiations, as if the rest of world were eager to embrace difficult decisions.''They're always the focus because they have so much power,'' said Jon Pronk, the United Nations special envoy to the meeting.''But it's necessary not only to be critical of the Americans,'' Mr. Pronk said. ''You have to be also critical of the Europeans. Agricultural subsidies are outrageously high in Europe. It's complex. It's not only a north-south dispute.''

IT is not a growth industry, but the fortunes of the mining and metals sector offer a window on the health of the global economy. For the short term, at least, the outlook does not seem promising. Prices for commodities like copper and aluminum are soft, and inventories are high. This has not been lost on Wall Street. With the exception of gold stocks, the sector has been in tough times. Peter D. Ward, a metals and mining analyst at Lehman Brothers, spoke last week about the industry. Following are excerpts from the conversation. Q. Why did you issue a gloomy assessment on Alcoa last week? A. I am not seeing any real signs of huge improvements in the domestic economy through the end of this year, and Alcoa is very much a U.S. company: about two-thirds of their revenues are from here. When you look at some of their key end markets -- housing, autos and aerospace, which together represent about 45 percent of the company's revenues -- it is hard to see how things improve next year. Our auto analyst is looking for a 4 percent drop in vehicle production in 2003, compared with this year. The fall off in aerospace construction hasn't happened yet, but orders have dropped off a lot. We are looking for a 15 percent to 20 percent decline in airplane construction next year. And it is hard to see how the housing market gets much better. In addition, in the last year there have been dramatic global increases in inventories. Prices are already under pressure, and supply growth looks like it will outpace demand for several years. Q. The International Trade Commission disallowed some additional tariff protection on cold-rolled steel last week. What effect will that have on the steel industry? A. The I.T.C. decision is not that damaging to steel producers. They were already protected. We have been pretty skeptical of the steel story for some time and felt the last thing the industry needed was more protection. The world has about one billion tons of steelmaking capacity, and we really only need about 850 million tons. But governments around the world, including and especially the United States, continue to protect the high-cost producers. As long as that continues, this oversupply situation will continue. That said, the tariffs put into place this year have without question improved domestic pricing this year, and next year you will see higher contract realizations. But these tariffs are temporary, and profitability gained through short-term tariffs warrants a very low equity multiple. Q. What is your view on copper mining companies? A. The outlook for copper is actually pretty good. It is one of the few commodities where prices will stop falling and start rising, because the easy, near-surface deposits have already been depleted. Right now, copper prices are a little bit below 70 cents a pound. At that level, about 5 percent of the world's supply is cash negative, which means companies are spending more to mine it than to sell it. Even if the economy doesn't rebound, eventually you will see more production curtailments. Q. Are there copper stocks you like? A. The purest play out there is Phelps Dodge, but we are not positive on the stock because the future price of the metal is already reflected in the company's stock price. And we are also concerned about projected cost reductions, which we don't think can be realized. The copper plays we do recommend are Freeport-McMoRan Copper and Gold Inc. and Rio Tinto Zinc, which trades as an A.D.R. in this country. Freeport-McMoRan is the lowest-cost producer of copper in the world. They are the lowest because they have a huge copper and gold deposit in Indonesia. That is the problem with the stock, even though it is the greatest mining asset in the world. But investing in mining shares involves political risk. You could argue that Arizona and New Mexico have big political risks, too, because those are not easy places to operate a mine. Q. What are the prospects for coal? A. As recently as 1998, when the Kyoto Protocol was signed, I was not thrilled about coal. We don't disagree with the findings about global warming, but coal is a critical part of the energy equation in this country: over half the electricity generated in the U.S. is coal-fired power generation. It is the cheapest delivered fossil fuel. We think stocks like Arch Coal are trading at very attractive valuations. Arch is trading at less than four times our 2003 estimate of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. For a quality company with decades of reserves, much of which has a low sulfur content, that is a very attractive valuation. MARKET INSIGHT

To the Editor:Re ''The Environmentalists Are Wrong,'' by Bjorn Lomborg (Op-Ed, Aug. 26):The cost of one year of the Kyoto climate treaty might well be enough to give everyone in the world clean water, food, education or any other utopian goodies one can dream up. The problem is, the political will to do so does not exist in many of the third-world countries Mr. Lomborg wants to save. Better to subvert the despotic regimes of the third world with a little democracy than to try to second-guess them by squabbling over which brand of utopia Western do-gooders would like to impose. Give them a democratic process, and you will see every adult man and woman demanding the basics of life that we in the West insist on. GAYL VEINOTTE  Calgary, Alberta, Aug. 26, 2002

The first of 100 world leaders who are to address the environmental summit meeting here issued strong criticism today of rich polluting nations -- the United States chief among them -- for refusing to ratify a treaty intended to prevent the devastating effects of climate change. But despite the pointed remarks from the leaders of France, Britain and other nations about the treaty, known as the Kyoto Protocol, American officials succeeded tonight in winning an important concession. A plan for converting world energy production from fossil fuels to solar and wind power and other renewable energy sources no longer contains a commitment to ensuring that such sources account for 15 percent of world energy output by 2010. Officials said delegates were close to final agreement on the plan, now that the provision has been dropped. Yvon Slingenberg, a senior member of the European Union's delegation, expressed disappointment that the United States and other countries had refused to embrace the targets for renewable energy.''We would have preferred to have a target and we would have preferred to have a timeline,'' Ms. Slingenberg said. ''This was not possible. We tried until the very end. At a certain stage there is a point of exhaustion.''Environmentalists, too, were critical, saying the United States, which has opposed targets and timetables, had repeatedly watered down the text. ''It's a shameful abrogation by governments who should be delivering on protection of climate, on protection of air quality,'' said Kate Hampton, international coordinator of Friends of the Earth, an advocacy group. The United States says it prefers concrete action to target dates that might ultimately prove meaningless. In getting the time frame eliminated, it found allies in developing countries, as well as Japan and Australia. Paula Dobriansky, under secretary of state for global affairs, defended the Bush administration's position, saying, ''The document clearly highlights the need to increase access to modern energy services and signals the valuable role renewable energy will play in the future.''During the course of the meeting, the administration has acceded to other proposals, agreeing for example on efforts to halve the number of people without sanitation by 2015 and to reduce the loss of endangered plants and animals by 2010. But the concessions have not quieted the discontent among America's allies, who argue that as the world's most powerful nation, the United States should do more to protect the environment. ''Our house is burning down and we're blind to it,'' President Jacques Chirac of France said in his speech here today. ''The earth and humankind are in danger, and we're all responsible. It's time to open our eyes.''''Climate warming is still reversible,'' Mr. Chirac asserted. ''Heavy would be the responsibility of those who refused to fight it.''In his speech, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain said leaders could not afford to allow poverty and environmental degradation to continue unchecked. ''Kyoto is right; it should be ratified by all of us,'' he said. ''The consequences of inaction on these issues are not unknown. They are calculable. Poverty and environmental degradation, if unchecked, spell catastrophe for our world. That is clear.''In speechmaking today, several leaders took the opportunity to weigh in on their own specific issues concerning the environment, politics and one another. President Hugo Chvez of Venezuela called for the creation of a global fund to ease poverty. President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda urged rich countries to open their markets to products from poor countries. Mr. Chirac called for an international solidarity tax on items like airline tickets and health products that would create a pool of money to help developing nations. And President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe received rousing applause from his fellow heads of state when he told Mr. Blair to stop interfering with his land redistribution program. Mr. Mugabe, saying sustainable development was not possible without land reform, said: ''Blair, keep your England. Let me keep my Zimbabwe.''Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, who is representing the United States in the absence of President Bush, will take his five minutes at the podium on Wednesday, officials say. American officials dismissed the criticisms made today, saying most delegations had responded positively to American contributions to the summit meeting's action plan. John F. Turner, assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs, said he was pleased with the commitments that had been made. He pointed to agreements on sanitation, improved governance and a deal to restore depleted fisheries, where possible, by 2015. As for global warming, Mr. Turner reiterated Washington's position. Mr. Bush asserted in rejecting the Kyoto treaty that it was unfair that the accord did not bind developing nations, especially China and India, that are also major emitters of gases that trap heat in the atmosphere.''We're strong supporters of the compromise on climate change,'' Mr. Turner said. ''We have our sovereign choice to pursue another path.''

After a week of intensive negotiations, diplomats arrived at a plan early that is intended to reduce poverty and preserve the earth's natural resources. After a week of intensive negotiations, diplomats here at the World Summit on Sustainable Development arrived at a plan early this morning that is intended to reduce poverty and preserve the earth's natural resources. The breakthrough came after diplomats worked late into the night on Tuesday to resolve a dispute over language in the conference's plan on health care for women. Also on Tuesday, Russia announced that it would ratify the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty intended to ease global warming -- a move virtually ensuring that the treaty would go into effect despite its rejection by the United States. Canada wanted the words ''in conformity with human rights and fundamental freedoms'' linked to health care to avoid condoning practices like female genital mutilation. Representatives of developing countries initially opposed the language, but backed down this morning.''We're very pleased,'' Kelly Morgan, a spokeswoman for the Canadian delegation, said. ''We are finished.''The plan is meant to set the global agenda for coming years. It calls on nations to reduce by half the number of poor people who lack sanitation by 2015; to commit to the sound management of chemicals with the goal of minimizing their adverse effects on health and nature by 2020; and to reduce significantly by 2010 the number of animals and plants having endangered status. The plan calls for the reduction of agricultural subsidies in wealthy countries, which, poor nations say, protect farmers in the United States and Europe from competition. It also urges nations to promote renewable energy sources like solar and wind power as well as to expand access to energy services by the poor. Officials from the United States and the United Nations praised the document, but it was sharply assailed by environmentalists and advocates for the poor, who complained that wealthy countries had weakened the language. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell flew in late on Tuesday and will make a speech here today. The United States, along with Canada, Japan and oil-producing countries, blocked an effort by the European Union to set a target and a timetable for the conversion from oil and gas to renewable sources of energy. The Europeans had sought a commitment to ensuring that renewable energy sources would account for 15 percent of the world's total energy production by 2010. But American officials opposed the target, saying they preferred concrete action to goals that might ultimately prove meaningless. In the end, the nations agreed to promote an increase in renewable energy, but rejected the specific target and time frame, officials said. The United States praised the plan and the negotiations that preceded it. ''It's a message of hope to impoverished areas of the world,'' said John F. Turner, assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs. ''I think it builds an excellent framework for going forward.''But Brooks Yeager of the World Wildlife Fund said most environmentalists were disappointed. ''We're particularly disappointed at the outcome of the energy discussions,'' he said. The secretary general of the conference, Nitin Desai, emphasized that leaders had succeeded in finding common ground in difficult discussions. But he, too, acknowledged that the plan was weaker than many hoped. ''In some areas,'' he said, ''I wish we could have done more.''Russia's decision was hailed as a step forward in the struggle to prevent the droughts, floods and agricultural disruptions many experts think is caused by climate change. Prime Minister Mikhail M. Kasyanov said Russia planned to ratify the Kyoto treaty ''in the very near future.'' Diplomats said they expected ratification by the end of the year. The treaty would set the first binding restrictions on releases of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases by industrial nations. Officials also said they hoped Russia's decision would put more pressure on President Bush, who angered many leaders last year when he rejected the accord. But Mr. Bush maintains that it could harm the American economy and that it is unfair because the required emissions cuts apply only to industrial powers, not to fast-growing developing countries like China and India. Among treaty supporters, Prime Minister Jean Chrtien of Canada pledged to push his Parliament to ratify the treaty by the end of the year. Environmentalists said they thought Russia was waiting to ratify the treaty in an effort to win concessions in other areas, like increased financial aid or compensation for maintaining vast forests that emit carbon dioxide. China announced today that it had ratified the treaty, but American officials said that did not change their position. As it now stands, the Kyoto accord does not require China to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions.

In 1997 environmental activists from Greenpeace occupied one of BP's North Atlantic oil-drilling platforms as part of a campaign to get the world to abandon fossil fuels. Last Friday in Johannesburg, at the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the activists joined representatives of the corporation on a different platform, at a news conference where they all endorsed binding government commitments to stem global warming. Their partnership, though limited, was emblematic of a new view of environmental problem-solving that emerged at the United Nations conference, which concluded yesterday. The strategy, which has evolved as a way around governmental resistance to change, involves pragmatic partnerships, sometimes between traditional adversaries. Experts and many of those taking part said this new approach might offer the best chance of seeing progress after years of stagnation on important environmental issues. Big pledges by major industrial powers may sound good, they say, but what is needed is progress on the ground. As the 10 days of formal talks and plenary sessions proceeded, projects were announced, some small and others ambitious, involving novel partnerships of governments, private groups, foundations and businesses. Their goals include improving health and sanitation, protecting forests, preserving fisheries and providing energy to the world's poorest communities.''It's time to end the lofty aspirations and move to action -- to real commitments,'' said one senior American official at the Johannesburg meeting. For nine months leading up to the summit meeting, that official said, government negotiators, private environmental groups, businesses and international agencies sifted for ideas they could put on the table in South Africa as evidence of their resolve. Dozens of proposals have been announced and will be under way soon. One, unveiled on Tuesday at the meeting, would protect 120 million acres of the Amazon River basin over the next 10 years, with money coming from Brazil, Germany, the World Bank, United Nations environmental funds and the World Wildlife Fund, a private group. Others involve commitments by industrial powers to export clean-burning energy technologies to developing countries that might otherwise burn coal, oil or other fuels without regard to pollution. To be sure, the Johannesburg meeting also produced the usual volume of delicately negotiated texts in which rich countries pledged to help poor countries. The declarations are important, providing governments with goals to which the public can hold them accountable. But they are are not binding. Generally, campaigners promoting an end to poverty and environmental damage said the negotiations had resulted in far too many compromises that in most cases did not advance countries' commitments beyond those they already made years earlier in other forums. Some weary environmental campaigners expressed equal grumpiness about what they saw as a lack of leadership on the part of the United States and a tendency of other countries to abandon hard targets for environmental cleanups or new energy technologies and blame the impasse on the United States. Still, there were enough of the new-style agreements to generate at least a modicum of optimism among experts ranging from environmental activists to corporate chiefs. Many of those participants say they are not disappointed that the Johannesburg meeting had no specific treaty or other agreement as a goal. The 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro produced two major treaties, they note, one on preserving biological diversity and another on preventing harmful climate change. Few experts regard either as effective. The lack of treaties as focal points may be exactly why this meeting could produce some breakthroughs, said several of those taking part. There was less of an impetus for the usual suspects to play their usual prominent adversarial roles. Both Greenpeace and the corporate executives emphasized that they still harbored major differences on many issues. ''This is not a merger,'' Bjorn Stigson, the president of the business council, said at the event. But they said they had decided to come together to show that they agreed on the importance of pushing ahead with the Kyoto Protocol, an addendum to the 1992 Rio climate treaty that would require industrial powers to reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases. The Bush administration rejected that treaty last year, while most other industrial countries have chosen to ratify it and abide by its terms. On Tuesday, Russian officials said their government planned to ratify it. If Russia does so, possibly before the end of the year, the Kyoto treaty will go into force, though only for the countries that ratified it. Over all, many delegates and lobbyists said, the new partnerships -- between old adversaries, between governments and private concerns -- were the heart of a promising new model for development. Antonio La Vina, a senior fellow at the World Resources Institute, a private Washington research group, said it was vital that the pace of change not rely on the once-a-decade pace of summitry.''It's a real challenge to find new ways of making these decisions and moving forward,'' he said. ''The old way has been glacial, which has not really served the planet or the people of this planet. If it's going to be a hundred years' war, there will be no victors.''News Analysis

In the diplomatic scramble before President Bush's address to the General Assembly on Thursday to explain why the United States is moving toward a military strike against Iraq, the key issues for the United Nations are what weapons Baghdad is developing and how fast. Despite a largely negative initial reaction to the Bush administration's stepped-up barrage of words directed against President Saddam Hussein in the last week, diplomats say there is broad agreement here that Baghdad has long been brazenly out of compliance with Security Council resolutions, including the armistice that ended the Persian Gulf war of 1991. If Mr. Bush makes a strong, detailed case that Mr. Hussein has vigorously reactivated programs to make biological, chemical and especially nuclear weapons since United Nations inspectors were last in Iraq in December 1998, many nations will be willing to listen, diplomats said. But a number of countries, including some major allies of the United States, are balking at the way the administration has pitched its argument so far. They were taken by surprise by American officials' assertions in recent days that Mr. Hussein had suddenly become so dangerous that he must be quickly toppled. Security Council members bridled at Vice President Dick Cheney's suggestion that a return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq would be a waste of precious time. In the background is the Bush administration's policy of ''regime change.'' The notion is anathema to many at the United Nations, who see it as smacking of the American arrogance of the cold war, when Washington sponsored coups to unseat governments it did not like. Respect for the sovereignty of other nations, even the less savory ones, is a core operating principle of the world organization. The administration policy ''collides with the role of the United Nations,'' said a senior diplomat from a Security Council member that could be an important swing vote. But he added that he was open to hearing Mr. Bush's arguments.''The United States does not have a weak case,'' the diplomat said. ''But the United States first has to prove its case, that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction and the intention to use them in an imminent attack.''The urgency of the need for action against Mr. Hussein is a matter dividing many nations from Washington. If Mr. Bush shows evidence that Iraq is working busily to build a nuclear weapon and is becoming an immediate danger, quite a few nations might consider supporting military action against him. But many countries are concerned that the Bush administration wants to drag them into a first strike against Baghdad on the vaguer ground that Mr. Hussein might become a nuclear threat some time in the future. That would be a major revision of a doctrine of pre-emptive first strike that is familiar in diplomacy, experts say. If the administration is proposing ''prevention of a remote threat, rather than an imminent threat, this is new,'' said Joseph S. Nye Jr., the dean of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University and a former assistant secretary of defense. Diplomats fear that if the administration fails to demonstrate that the weapons threat from Iraq is immediate, it may provide a justification for countries locked in all kinds of prickly disputes to attack their adversaries. They note that Mr. Hussein himself might seize on the administration's argument for attacking him to justify a pre-emptive strike in self-defense against the United States or a third country. As a result, several Security Council members have openly opposed that strategy. Russia, a permanent, veto-bearing member of the Security Council, argues that Mr. Hussein should be given positive incentives. Russia has suggested a resolution that would make it easier for Iraq to reach compliance and achieve the lifting of tough sanctions. But diplomats said Russia could not ignore persuasive evidence from Washington about the possibility of nuclear weapons in Iraq. In the last year, much of the good will the the United States enjoyed at the United Nations after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks has eroded. The administration has had running clashes in the organization over the Kyoto treaty on global warming. Delegates from 78 countries have been meeting here for a week to forge operating procedures for the International Criminal Court, which the Bush administration opposes. Presiding over the gathering on the international court is Prince Zeid bin Raad, the ambassador from Jordan, a country whose help could be valuable to the United States in a military assault on Iraq. He and delegates from Canada and the European Union, American allies that strongly support the court, have been struggling to give it international legitimacy in the face of efforts to curb its jurisdiction by the world's remaining superpower. Against the backdrop of those tensions, some diplomats are irritated that Mr. Bush seems to be coming to the United Nations to present a decision to strike Mr. Hussein, rather than an effort to garner support for an operation if necessary.''You don't have to go to the United Nations to ask to authorize military action,'' David Hannay, Britain's ambassador here during the gulf war, said by telephone from London. ''You can go there to marshal as broad a coalition as you can.'' For many European allies, he said, it is particularly important to see that Washington is not snubbing the United Nations. Security Council diplomats also argued that the administration had been too hasty to dismiss the work of United Nations weapons inspectors. If Mr. Hussein permits the inspectors to return, the diplomats said, their mere presence will force him to focus on concealing his weapons programs, significantly slowing his progress. If he should continue to refuse to allow them in, they said, he would be in such obvious violation of Council resolutions that it would be hard for most nations not to support military action. THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY

Only 48 hours after the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, George W. Bush first defined the role that the campaign against terrorism would play in his untried presidency. ''The nation must understand,'' Mr. Bush said somberly, speaking to reporters on a sparkling morning in the Oval Office, ''this is now the focus of my administration.''In the year since then, Mr. Bush has seen how difficult that focus has been to sustain. The economy, the corporate scandals and the violence in the Middle East have blown him off course, and are certain to again. But the terrorist threat has remained his priority. Today, as the White House put the nation on a heightened state of alert, Mr. Bush declared, ''Today and tomorrow we'll be reliving a horrible reminder of what is possible in the 21st century -- that is, no country is immune from attack.''That reality has shaped his presidency. Now Mr. Bush seems determined to transform Sept. 11 into a milestone on the road to war with Iraq, and to use last year's attack by Osama bin Laden and the continued threat from Al Qaeda to justify this year's pursuit of Saddam Hussein. Clearly, the two are not yet linked in the minds of many Americans and most of America's allies. Before today's threat, polls showed Americans largely out of sync with the president, more worried about a jobless recovery than terrorism. But over the past year, the linkage in the president's mind between Mr. bin Laden and Mr. Hussein has grown tighter -- and given birth to a new policy of pre-emption that encapsulates Mr. Bush's view that the United States must strike before it is struck again. Iraq may be the first test of that approach, and of his ability to persuade the world that inaction will invite greater disasters. The president's most hawkish advisers in fact urged him to move against Mr. Hussein in the first days after the Sept. 11 attacks, even absent any evidence that he was involved. While Mr. Bush demurred at the time, White House advisers now assert that targeting Mr. Hussein was first set as a goal last fall, to be pursued as soon as the Taliban and Al Qaeda were routed from Afghanistan. They portray the president's Sept. 20 speech to Congress, when Mr. Bush outlined his administration's doctrine against terrorism, as a first step against Mr. Hussein. The next came in Mr. Bush's State of Union address in January that named Iraq as the leader of an ''axis of evil,'' along with Iran and North Korea.''There is a logical extension of what the president talked about on Sept. 20 a year ago, and in his State of the Union address, to the discussions that are taking place today,'' said Andrew H. Card Jr., the White House chief of staff. Condoleezza Rice, the president's national security adviser, acknowledges that the president's aggressive approach departs sharply from the ''humble foreign policy'' Mr. Bush talked about so often during his presidential campaign. But Ms. Rice says there is no other choice.''It's a wartime presidency,'' she said in an interview, using a phrase that Mr. Bush's aides now often toss around casually, even though it seems jarring to many Americans who see the country in a struggle with terrorists, but not a global all-out war. Others close to Mr. Bush say that his fears of another Sept. 11 are driving him so hard that they have crowded out other priorities.''He's not focused on the prescription drug bill and the farm bill, he's thinking about this,'' said Roland Betts, one of Mr. Bush's closest friends. Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political adviser, said the president has told his staff that although he wants a ''robust'' domestic agenda, ''I am not going to be able to spend as much time on it'' and that the staff will have to step in and do what he cannot. Mr. Betts added that Mr. Bush's urgency about Iraq was fueled by intelligence information and not the November midterm elections or any father-son psychodrama, a popular theory in Washington, over the first President Bush's decision not to march to Baghdad and oust Mr. Hussein during the Persian Gulf War.''He's not making this up,'' Mr. Betts said. ''This whole thing about finishing what his father left off is nonsense. He worries that these people will acquire and detonate some sort of weapon on our soil.''But unlike a year ago, when the nation and the world were with Mr. Bush as he struck back at the Taliban and Al Qaeda in Afghanistan, this time the president must do a lot of convincing. On Thursday he will make his case to the United Nations. He is confronting enormous skepticism, not only from Arabs and Europeans who warn of disaster ahead, but also from stalwart Republicans who fear he is diverting attention from a greater threat -- a resurgent Al Qaeda. Without question, he is taking the biggest risk so far in his presidency. A Daily Report on ThreatsA key to Mr. Bush's state of mind is to know that every morning, in Washington, Camp David or on the road, he begins his working day with the ''threat assessment,'' a compilation of what United States intelligence services and law enforcement agencies pick up about potential terrorist activity. Mr. Bush, who asked for the summary in the first days after Sept. 11, is the first president to be presented daily with such an extensive, detailed catalog of the susceptibilities of the United States to terrorist attack. His advisers say it has both sharpened and sobered him.''The first reaction is, I'm glad I know about it,'' Ms. Rice said, adding that ''on the other hand, it reminds you every morning of the vulnerability.''The assessment, which runs 5 to 25 pages, includes a summarizing chart, or what White House advisers call a matrix. It lists the nature of each threat, the potential target, the method by which the United States gathered the intelligence, any corroborating information, and who has been notified, as Mr. Card put it, ''to mitigate the concern.''In the Oval Office, Mr. Bush usually reads through the threat assessment when he arrives between 6:45 and 7 a. m., then reviews it at the start of his first briefing of the day, from the Central Intelligence Agency, around 8. That briefing includes the president, Vice President Dick Cheney, Mr. Card, Ms. Rice and George Tenet, the director of central intelligence. Mr. Tenet also brings along a specialist, or briefer, to present the information.''The briefer might say, 'I want to call your attention to number three, we take this seriously, or 'We've had some information from another source that sounds similar, so we're going to see if they marry up,' '' Mr. Card said. The assessment is reviewed a second time at the start of Mr. Bush's next briefing, with the F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III. That briefing, sometimes also attended by Mr. Tenet, is intended to focus on threats inside the United States, but also to force the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. to view the information as a whole -- exactly what they did not do in the months leading up to Sept. 11. White House advisers say much of what the president sees is finely grained detail, like the intelligence that led to today's decision to move to code orange for the first time, as well as broader warnings that are hard to assess. Some experienced intelligence experts say they fear that the president is being given too much information -- some of it unreliable, they say, some included because, in the words of one White House official, ''when the next attack happens, no one wants to be the one who left out the critical warning sign.''Strategy Is Pre-EmptionMr. Bush's aides are circumspect when asked about the psychological impact of this daily barrage of threats. But from those pages has emerged a new national security strategy -- one based on pre-emption, and driven by Mr. Bush's often-expressed view that his presidency will be judged in large part by how well he neutralizes threats before they reach American shores again. The result is a tremendous shift in America's approach to dealing with enemies and allies -- a strike-first philosophy that is still a work in progress.''You can call it pre-emption, or preventative defense, or any other phrase you might read about in 'Foreign Affairs,' '' said one member of Mr. Bush's foreign policy team, who has often sat with the president in the Situation Room as he considers his options.''But it's old-fashioned self-protection -- and it comes from the president's gut,'' the adviser added. ''The example he refers to from time to time is the Cuban Missile Crisis. In his mind, it's got that urgency.''Ms. Rice, a former Stanford professor, insists that Mr. Bush is not creating an intellectual construct that will let the United States strike anywhere, anytime, without the sanction of the United Nations. But she insists that Sept. 11 reinforced the need for what she calls an ''organizing principle'' for how he would deal with the world, a way to adjust to an era in which, ''for less than the cost of a tank, terrorists wreaked unbelievable damage and havoc on the United States.''''The end of the cold war and Sept. 11 are kind of bookends,'' she said. ''You have a long transition in there, when people talked about, well, maybe it would be ethnic conflict that was the big threat, or the Army was just going to be for humanitarian purposes and peacekeeping.''Mr. Bush is now convinced, she said, that ''terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, and the potential link between them, are the key threats.''This is not the kind of approach one might have expected listening to Mr. Bush in the 2000 campaign, a campaign in which terrorism and Saddam Hussein were scarcely discussed. Two years ago Mr. Bush himself was talking about an America that stuck to its knitting, that stayed out of what he dismissively called ''nation building,'' and offered no lectures or ultimatums.''I'm not so sure the role of the United States is to go around the world and say, 'This is the way it's got to be,' '' Mr. Bush said in his second debate against Al Gore. He clearly had amended that view even before Sept. 11. His early announcement that the Kyoto protocol on global warming was ''dead'' and then his withdrawal from the 1972 ABM treaty demonstrated a willingness to toss aside international accords if they got in his way. Then, stung by charges that he was a unilateralist, he tried to soften his tone, if not his belief. Then came Sept. 11. ''I think as a result of 9/11 particularly he sees the value of coalitions and friends,'' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said in an interview earlier this summer. ''He saw the value of having people on his side.''But that attention to alliances seems episodic at best, and undercut by regular warnings that he ''reserves the right'' to act against Iraq alone. Some of Mr. Bush's Republican allies fear that in the past year the president's worldview has become an intensely dark one, that he focuses far more energy on striking out than building up, on routing despots rather than rebuilding schools. This has led to a resurgence of the cowboy images of Mr. Bush that were so prevalent before Sept. 11, and cemented in the eyes of many allies when he declined to attend the conference on sustainable development in South Africa this month.''What we are fighting,'' said one senior State Department official whose sympathies in the administration's battles lie clearly with Secretary Powell, ''is a view that he is willing to go to the U.N. to talk about whacking Saddam, but not about whether we should be driving so many SUV's, or the rest of the world's agenda. And while that view is overdrawn, it isn't entirely wrong.''THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE WHITE HOUSE

On Friday, the Bush administration will publish its first comprehensive rationale for shifting American military strategy toward pre-emptive action against hostile states and terrorist groups developing weapons of mass destruction. The strategy document will also state, for the first time, that the United States will never allow its military supremacy to be challenged the way it was during the cold war. In the 33-page document, Mr. Bush also seeks to answer the critics of growing American muscle-flexing by insisting that the United States will exploit its military and economic power to encourage ''free and open societies,'' rather than seek ''unilateral advantage.'' It calls this union of values and national interests ''a distinctly American internationalism.'' [Excerpts, Page A14. ]The document, titled ''The National Security Strategy of the United States,'' is one that every president is required to submit to Congress. It is the first comprehensive explanation of the administration's foreign policy, from defense strategy to global warming. A copy of the final draft was obtained by The New York Times. It sketches out a far more muscular and sometimes aggressive approach to national security than any since the Reagan era. It includes the discounting of most nonproliferation treaties in favor of a doctrine of ''counterproliferation,'' a reference to everything from missile defense to forcibly dismantling weapons or their components. It declares that the strategies of containment and deterrence -- staples of American policy since the 1940's -- are all but dead. There is no way in this changed world, the document states, to deter those who ''hate the United States and everything for which it stands.''''America is now threatened less by conquering states than we are by failing ones,'' the document states, sounding what amounts to a death knell for many of the key strategies of the cold war. One of the most striking elements of the new strategy document is its insistence ''that the president has no intention of allowing any foreign power to catch up with the huge lead the United States has opened since the fall of the Soviet Union more than a decade ago.''''Our forces will be strong enough,'' Mr. Bush's document states, ''to dissuade potential adversaries from pursuing a military buildup in hopes of surpassing, or equaling, the power of the United States.'' With Russia so financially hobbled that it can no longer come close to matching American military spending, the doctrine seemed aimed at rising powers like China, which is expanding its conventional and nuclear forces. Administration officials who worked on the strategy for months say it amounts to both a maturation and an explanation of Mr. Bush's vision for the exercise of America power after 20 months in office, integrating the military, economic and moral levers he holds. Much of the document focuses on how public diplomacy, the use of foreign aid, and changes in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank can be used to win what it describes as a battle of competing values and ideas -- including ''a battle for the future of the Muslim world.''The president put the final touches on the new strategy last weekend at Camp David after working on it for months with his national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, and with other members of the national security team. In its military hawkishness, its expressions of concern that Russian reforms could be undermined by the country's elite, and its focus on bolstering foreign aid -- especially for literacy training and AIDS -- it particularly bears the stamp of Ms. Rice's thinking. A senior White House official said Mr. Bush had edited the document heavily ''because he thought there were sections where we sounded overbearing or arrogant.'' But at the same time, the official said, it is important to foreclose the option that other nations could aspire to challenge the United States militarily, because ''once you cut off the challenge of military competition, you open up the possibility of cooperation in a number of other areas.''Still, the administration's critics at home and abroad will almost certainly find ammunition in the document for their argument that Mr. Bush is only interested in a multilateral approach as long as it does not frustrate his will. At several points, the document states clearly that when important American interests are at stake there will be no compromise. The document argues that while the United States will seek allies in the battle against terrorism, ''we will not hesitate to act alone, if necessary, to exercise our right of self-defense by acting pre-emptively.'' That includes ''convincing or compelling states to accept their sovereign responsibilities'' not to aid terrorists, the essence of the doctrine Mr. Bush declared on the night of Sept. 11, 2001. The White House delayed releasing the document this week so that its lengthy discussion of conditions under which the United States might take unilateral, pre-emptive action would not dominate delicate negotiations in the United Nations or the testimony of administration officials who appeared at Congressional hearings to discuss Iraq. The new strategy departs significantly from the last one published by President Clinton, at the end of 1999. Mr. Clinton's strategy dealt at length with tactics to prevent the kind of financial meltdowns that threatened economies in Asia and Russia. The Bush strategy urges other nations to adopt Mr. Bush's own economic philosophy, starting with low marginal tax rates. While Mr. Clinton's strategy relied heavily on enforcing or amending a series of international treaties, from the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty to Kyoto protocols on the environment, Mr. Bush's strategy dismisses most of those efforts. In fact, the new document -- which Mr. Bush told his staff had to be written in plain English because ''the boys in Lubbock ought to be able to read it'' -- celebrates his decision last year to abandon the ABM treaty because it impeded American efforts to build a missile defense system. It recites the dangers of nonproliferation agreements that have failed to prevent Iran, North Korea, Iraq and other countries from obtaining weapons of mass destruction, and says that the United States will never subject its citizens to the newly created International Criminal Court, ''whose jurisdiction does not extend to Americans.''The document makes no reference to the Kyoto accord, but sets an ''overall objective'' of cutting American greenhouse gas emissions ''per unit of economic activity by 18 percent over the next 10 years.'' The administration says that is a reasonable goal given its view of the current state of environmental science. Its critics, however, point out that the objective is voluntary, and allows enormous room for American emissions to increase as the American economy expands. The doctrine also describes at great length the administration's commitment to bolstering American foreign aid by 50 percent in the next few years in ''countries whose governments rule justly, invest in their people and encourage economic freedom.'' It insists that the programs must have ''measurable results'' to assure that the money is actually going to the poor, especially for schools, health care and clean water. THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY  Correction:  September 21, 2002, Saturday  Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the Bush administration's adoption of a doctrine of pre-emptive action against hostile countries placed a passage in quotation marks erroneously in a description of the 33-page document prepared for Congress. The comment -- that the president has no intention of allowing any foreign power to catch up with the huge lead the United States has opened since the fall of the Soviet Union more than a decade ago -- was the writer's summation of interviews with senior administration officials. Correction: September 21, 2002, SaturdayBecause of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about the Bush administration's adoption of a doctrine of pre-emptive action against hostile countries placed a passage in quotation marks erroneously in a description of the 33-page document prepared for Congress. The comment -- that the president has no intention of allowing any foreign power to catch up with the huge lead the United States has opened since the fall of the Soviet Union more than a decade ago -- was the writer's summation of interviews with senior administration officials.<br><br>

The United States energy secretary told his counterparts from other countries on Saturday that current high oil prices could harm global economic growth. The United States energy secretary told his counterparts from other countries today that current high oil prices and volatility in the market could harm global economic growth.''High prices could produce an undesirable ripple effect on the economies of the world,'' the American secretary, Spencer Abraham, said in an address to the opening session of the International Energy Forum, a gathering of ministers from 65 countries. ''If the industrialized world experiences an economic slump, its markets for the developing world's products will contract, damaging developing economies.''His comments came after the decision on Thursday by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries to leave its production quotas intact but to promise to pump additional oil if shortages develop, including one stemming from an attack on Iraq. OPEC's decision could lead to tight supplies and higher prices globally because oil importers will likely have to use their inventories to meet demand during the winter months. Today, Mr. Abraham said, ''High prices may be pleasing to producers in the short term, but in the long term, volatile pricing regimes of this kind are destabilizing and harmful to all participants.''As energy ministers spoke at the forum, the meeting's sponsor, the International Energy Agency, released a study saying that the global economy will become even more dependent on oil from the Middle East over the next three decades. The study said such continued reliance would further heighten concerns about the security of energy supplies and the ability of major nations to reduce greenhouse gases. In its biannual world energy outlook, the agency also said it expects oil prices to average $21 a barrel through the end of the decade -- down from nearly $30 now -- despite renewed prospects for a global economic expansion and political uncertainty in the Middle East. Cheap and abundant oil from the Middle East will be coupled by a decline in the use of coal and nuclear power, except in Asia, where China and India will increase mining, it said. Gyrations in price resulting from political instability in the Middle East will remain, the agency said, because oil and other fossil fuels will meet more than 90 percent of the world's new energy needs. Almost all additional oil needs will be met by producers in the region as well as Russia. Developing countries, particularly China, will consume about two-thirds of the new oil supply, the report said.''Security of supply has come back to the top of the agenda and likely will remain there,'' Robert Priddle, the agency's executive director, said. Reliance on Middle East oil will be heightened because the growth of supplies in North America and Europe is likely to slow in the coming years, the agency said. At the same time, it said, most industrialized countries will funnel proportionately less money into developing nuclear energy as they retire existing facilities. They will also scale back the use of coal as they try to meet emissions targets in the Kyoto protocol on global warming. The forecast highlights some of the differences between the agency and OPEC. Representing large oil-consuming nations, the agency, based in Paris, tends to push for greater production and lower prices. By contrast, OPEC prefers to make cautious forecasts for oil demand fearing that prices could plummet if it pumps more oil and demand does not rise fast enough to meet it. On Thursday, Rilwanu Lukman, the president of OPEC and Nigeria's top oil official, described talk of oil shortages as ''scare mongering.''Regardless, the global economy is likely to remain hostage to volatile oil markets, the energy agency said. ''Unless surplus capacity in current oil production and refining increases, markets will remain sensitive to actual or feared swings or disruptions in supply, whether political or technical,'' its report said.

To the Editor:Your article about efforts to install a traffic light in Brooklyn Heights (''This Quest Makes Diogenes' Task Look Easy,'' Sept. 15) shows how new blood in the City Council can achieve long-sought projects. But the Council should be more original and bold. The large number of requests for new traffic lights and their high costs ($50,000 apiece) aren't the only issues at stake. For instance, when Seattle decided last year to meet the emission-reduction targets of the Kyoto Protocol, the city undertook replacing 40-watt traffic lights with more efficient 4-watt light-emitting diodes. Such a change would significantly reduce Seattle's contribution to global warming by reducing the city's dependence on emissions-producing power plants. The cost of replacement would pay for itself in two years of lower energy use; in New York, it would take three years. ROBERT JERESKI  Tudor CityThe writer was a Green Party candidate for City Council last fall.

Last January, Larry Burns, General Motors' vice president for research and development and planning, unveiled the company's plans for the car of the future. It wasn't exactly a car but the underpinnings of one, sort of a 16-foot-long, two-dimensional wine carafe on wheels -- what Burns called the ''skateboard.'' The car would come in two parts, Burns explained. The car's power and control system would be encased in the skateboard, which could be kept for decades while customers shuffled car bodies as tastes changed. And the bodies, too, would be radically different from what we know, with the windshield extending all the way down to the floor because the car's essential systems are kept underfoot. The first working prototype, dubbed Hy-wire, made its debut at the Paris Motor Show last week. Hy-wire represents a merging of technologies: the hydrogen fuel cell, a power system that creates electrical current from chemical reactions and drive-by-wire, which replaces mechanical linkages between parts with electronic ones. Taken together, the technologies would move the automobile from the machine age to the digital age and result in a car that emits only water vapor. Burns, 51, earned his bachelor's degree from a Flint, Mich., university once called the General Motors Institute, but he preferred hanging out with Ann Arbor intellectuals while in school and got his doctorate from Berkeley. He says he believes there is enough evidence for carmakers to take global warming seriously. ''If it's true,'' Burns says, ''the ramifications are so significant that it's irresponsible not to be addressing it.'' It's a stance that puts him at odds with many people at G.M., among them the company's stogie-wielding vice chairman, Bob Lutz, who talks of global warming as tree-huggers' hokum and of the Kyoto Protocol as conspiracy theory. Rick Wagoner, G.M.'s C.E.O., falls somewhere in between. ''You read one article and it is and another article and it isn't,'' Wagoner says of global warming. ''I'm not a scientist. I don't think it's healthy for our industry to be exposed to a huge degree of risk here.'' For their part, environmentalists view G.M.'s quest for the ultimate green vehicle with suspicion. This is the company making a mass-market brand out of Hummer, after all, and arguing on Capitol Hill that being forced to make more efficient cars now will only undercut their work on the fuel cell for the future.''It's like Wimpy from 'Popeye,''' says Dan Becker of the Sierra Club. ''I'd gladly pay you Tuesday for a hamburger today. It's amazing G.M. gets away with it.''But G.M. insists that the environment is one key reason why it is taking Burns's project seriously. With 700 million vehicles in the world today and 1.1 billion expected by 2020, Burns says, short-term options like gas-electric hybrids or highly efficient gas cars can only delay, not halt, global warming. ''You've got to get to an endgame here,'' he says. In the 1990's, environmental politics grew increasingly intense. California moved to force automakers to sell superefficient cars (and this year, it passed legislation to reduce greenhouse gases). Subsequently, the entire auto industry sped up its work on the electric car. The result, though, was frustration. In the late 1990's, G.M. scrapped its ambitious EV1 because the car could only travel 80 miles between charges. Last month, Ford gave up on its battery cars. And while Toyota continues to sell an electric S.U.V. in California, it does not do a compelling business. The question for carmakers became, What if an electric car generated its own electricity? The obvious ways to achieve that were through either the fuel cell (in which electrons are stripped from hydrogen atoms and used to form an electric current) or the gas-electric hybrid. In the mid-1990's, a high-level debate took place within G.M. to determine whether to focus on fuel cells or gas-electric hybrids. ''We did not view the hybrid as the ultimate solution to the problem,'' Wagoner says. ''In a high-fuel-cost environment, a hybrid could work. It's hard to see that happening in the U.S.''To much fanfare, Toyota and Honda began selling hybrids in the late 1990's, and each now sells tens of thousands, far more successful than electrics ever were but still small numbers. The hybrids are expensive to build, however, and what is not clear is whether they will ever make a profit. Every major automaker is working on fuel cells, but most conform to the design of normal cars. Hy-wire is not designed around an internal combustion engine, so it has no dashboard and few moving parts except for tires. Brake pedal and accelerator are replaced with electronically controlled steering using hand grips on the wheel. (One's feet wander reflexively, and it's easy to confuse twisting to speed up and squeezing to stop, but a few lazy eights around a parking lot makes it intuitive.)Not everyone at G.M. is convinced that Burns's vision will materialize. ''I just can't help remaining skeptical,'' Bob Lutz says, ''because I've lived through a series of miracle engines.'' He took pleasure in rolling his eyes at motoring revolutions of the past -- the jet engine, the Wankel engine, the orbital engine -- that are now all but discarded. ''We have to be careful not to create the impression that all of this is just around the corner.''Burns is tactful in response. ''Bob's one of my two bosses,'' he says. ''Even if he wasn't my boss, out of respect for him and his knowledge of the industry, I have to take his perspective into account.'' He adds, though, that automakers have been focused on fuel cells for less than a decade, compared with a century of dead ends on batteries, and are quickly closing the gap. Storage capacity has expanded to allow nearly 200 miles of range, far more than a battery-electric. The fact that Hy-wire's pressurized hydrogen gas tanks lie below the driver and passengers is a safety concern, so engineers are working on a spongelike form of hydrogen storage. Costs have come down by a factor of 10 in a decade, but Burns concedes another factor of 10 remains. Still, he maintains that G.M. can produce tens of thousands by 2010 and phase in broad usage by 2020.''This can be a better car all around,'' Burns says of the fuel cell. The right thing to do? Yes, he says, but it's more than that. ''At this point, it's a business issue. If we don't invent it, somebody else will.''CARS Danny Hakim reports on the auto industry for The New York Times.

To the Editor:Re ''Rising Star Lost in Russia's Latest Disaster'' (news article, Sept. 24):With climate change linked to the worldwide retreat of glaciers, and very possibly having caused the glacier collapse in Russia, it is worth noting that the greatest obstacle to the Kyoto protocol's entrance into force is Russia's own signature. Without Russia's support, the threshold 55 percent of industrialized-nations emissions needed to activate the agreement cannot be met. One can only hope that this tragedy can be lessened by providing the impetus needed for Russia to lead the world into this treaty. JEREMY ARLING  Eugene, Ore., Sept. 24, 2002

On issues large and small, the Bush administration has spent the better part of two years rolling back Bill Clinton's environmental legacy. It has abandoned the Kyoto accord on global warming, weakened protections for wetlands and eased mining laws. Now it appears to be aiming at even bigger game -- the National Environmental Policy Act, regarded as the Magna Carta of environmental protection and perhaps the most important of all the environmental statutes signed into law by Richard Nixon three decades ago. The act, NEPA for short, is no stranger to controversy. Bureaucrats blame it for gridlock, commercial interests for blocking progress. Environmentalists, of course, love it, as well they should. The act is essentially a sunshine law. It requires all federal agencies to make a detailed assessment of the consequences of any project likely to have a significant impact on the environment, and make that assessment available for comment from the public and other federal agencies. The law does not mandate particular outcomes. Its purpose is to keep federal agencies from doing destructive things -- clear-cutting forests, straightening rivers, destroying wildlife in the name of development -- under cover of darkness. And over the years it has done a world of good. The Bush administration has been seeking to ignore or limit the reach of this statute in three main areas. The clearest example is forest policy. Mr. Bush's ''Healthy Forests'' initiative, now the subject of intense debate in Congress, would ease NEPA requirements for timber projects that the federal government deems necessary to prevent fires. Conservationists believe that many such projects are in fact camouflage for commercial logging. They are worried, and rightly so, that suspending NEPA could lead to widespread environmental degradation for no other purpose than to enrich the timber companies. Energy policy has been equally troublesome. Though President Bush has never hidden his desire to open up vast expanses of the public lands to oil and gas drilling, the White House has always insisted that it had no intention of end-running NEPA. But in fact it has. In recent months, at least two projects -- a 77,000-well methane project in Wyoming and Montana, and a seismic testing project near Arches National Park in Utah -- have been challenged (and may ultimately be significantly revised) because the administration failed to do the necessary environmental reviews. The administration has also tried to limit the law's reach offshore. In a recent court case, involving a Navy plan to test sonar devices off the Pacific Coast, the Justice Department argued that the Navy was under no obligation to assess potential harm to marine life. The Natural Resources Defense Council sued, arguing that not only did the law apply but that suspending it in this case would open the door to a range of unregulated and potentially destructive activities, including ocean dumping and the overfishing of depleted species. The judge sided with the environmentalists, who, though pleased with the ruling, regard it as only a temporary respite in the NEPA wars. Even now, a White House task force is working on ways to ''enhance'' the act by streamlining it. That sounds innocent enough, but based on the administration's behavior so far, some fear that the real intent is not to streamline the process but to circumvent it, perhaps by executive order. Congress, which wrote this law 33 years ago, must be alert to any effort to undermine it.

It's hard to believe that just a year ago, in the wake of 9/11, the French newspaper Le Monde carried the headline ''We are all Americans now.'' What a difference a year makes. Today, I figured, that headline would probably read: ''We are all anti-Americans now.'' So I called Alain Frachon, the senior editor of Le Monde, and asked him how his paper was viewing America today. I was close. He said: ''The same columnist who wrote that piece a year ago on 9/11 wrote another one this year on the first anniversary. This year, though, his headline was: 'We are all still Americans -- but not every day now.' ''What happened? Where did all that empathy go? Obviously, much of that initial burst of pro-Americanism was the world's gut reaction to the horror of 9/11, and when America soon started exercising its power to retaliate some of it was naturally going to dissipate. At the same time, because America today is so much more powerful, economically and militarily, than anyone else, it is always going to engender a certain amount of envy and animosity. But while some will always dislike us for who we are, many now oppose us for what we do or say. And to the extent that we can neutralize some of that before we take on Iraq, we would be doing ourselves a world of good. What to do? President Bush had the right impulse on this issue during the campaign, when he said America needed to be ''humble -- proud and confident of our values, but humble.'' Unfortunately, his team has lost some of that humility. I loved Don Rumsfeld's briefings during the Afghan war. They were no-nonsense tough, with a dose of American nationalism that resonated with me. But lately I feel, coming from the Pentagon, a certain degree of imperial contempt for the rest of the world, especially the Arab-Muslim world. It's not healthy. I applaud Mr. Rumsfeld's slamming of Yasir Arafat, but when he refers to the ''so-called occupied territories'' he tells the entire Muslim world that America is utterly indifferent to Israeli settlements and how they have contributed to the current impasse. I have long felt that 9/11 was perpetrated and applauded by people who feel envy toward America, or humiliated by its success and their failure at modernity. That doesn't mean we should coddle them. It means we should criticize them -- loudly -- and the regimes that produce them. But there are two kinds of critics in life: those who criticize you because they want you to fail and those who criticize you because they want you to succeed. And people can smell the difference a mile away. If you convey to people that you really want them to succeed, they will take any criticism you dish out. If you convey that you really hold them in contempt, you can tell them that the sun is shining and they won't listen to you. There is too much criticism-with-contempt oozing from the Pentagon, which, unfortunately, has become the voice of America lately. It feels as if we don't have a rounded foreign policy anymore -- only a defense policy. I would like to hear more of Secretary of State Colin Powell's voice -- a voice that says America is not just about disarming rogues, although we will if we have to, but also about inviting others into our future. And it is too bad that Mr. Bush's instinctive humility has given way lately to Texas cowboy lingo when talking about Iraq. I'm sure it helps whip up crowds at Republican fund-raisers, but, as Mr. Frachon put it, ''it doesn't cross the ocean well.''Beyond tone, there is also substance. We will never be taken seriously by the world if we go on telling others that they are either with us or against us in the war on terrorism -- but that in the war for a greener planet, in the war against global warming, sorry, we're not with you, we're taking a powder, because we don't want to give up our energy gluttony. President Bush promised that he would offer a credible alternative to the Kyoto treaty. Where is it? The Bush team would also buy itself more support abroad if it made a more energetic effort to defuse the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Mr. Bush has been great about telling the truth to Palestinians that they need a new leader, but he has been awful about telling the truth to Ariel Sharon that he needs to end settlements, and the whole world sees the hypocrisy. Good will and popularity are underrated strategic assets. With a few small adjustments in tone or policy, we could buy so much more of both today. And if we launch a war to remake Iraq, we're going to want all the global good will we can get.

The latest round of international talks on global warming are focused more on ways to adapt to changes than on cutting emissions of gases. The latest round of international talks on global warming begins today in New Delhi, with delegates focused more on ways to adapt to changes than on cutting emissions of gases that scientists say are the main cause of rising temperatures. The shift in focus is to some extent motivated by the Bush administration's rejection of the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 climate pact completed last year and endorsed by most of the world's countries, rich and poor. Without the United States, the world's largest producer of greenhouse gases, the Kyoto treaty is so weak, experts and government officials say, that it may have little effect. Others say the treaty has in any case been so watered down through years of negotiations that it is likely to be of limited benefit. Instead of looking mostly at ways to reduce the level of heat-trapping gases, then, the 10-day conference ''will discuss how to build greater capacity, especially in developing countries, for minimizing vulnerabilities and preparing for worsening droughts, floods, storms, health emergencies, and other expected impacts,'' said a statement issued by the United Nations, which supervises the talks. The shift satisfies the Bush administration, which has fought to avoid mandatory cuts in admissions for fear it would harm the economy. ''We're welcoming a focus on more of a balance on adaptation versus mitigation,'' said a senior American negotiator in New Delhi. ''You don't have enough money to do everything.''Many developing countries also embraced the change as an opportunity to press for more aid from rich nations. A central question in New Delhi, several delegates said in interviews, will be how much should the industrialized countries -- which generate most of the greenhouse gases released into the air -- pay to help poorer countries deal with the consequences. Some private environmental groups criticized the shift, saying that it was essential for countries to intensify efforts to blunt the human impact on climate even as they seek ways to deal with the consequences. Others said that even a weak treaty was better than none at all. ''The protocol does not do much of anything for the atmosphere,'' said Eileen Claussen, the president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, a private group. ''But you've got to get a framework in place before you can take more than relatively small steps.''The treaty, if it enters into force early next year as most delegates expect, would technically require industrialized countries that are signatories to cut their emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases by 2012 to more than 5 percent below levels measured in 1990. But it includes a host of compromises that limit the need to cut releases from smokestacks and tailpipes. For example, it grants credits for growing forests, which absorb carbon dioxide. The Kyoto pact grants billions of tons of carbon-dioxide credits to Russia, where the economic implosion of the last decade resulted in emissions diving far below 1990 levels. Other countries can meet their treaty targets at least in part by purchasing some of Russia's surplus credits, which some environmental groups have taken to calling ''hot air'' credits. One of the biggest weaknesses, experts say, comes from the abandonment of the treaty last year by the United States, which produces about half of all the carbon dioxide released by industrialized countries and a fourth of the global total. President Bush this year called for voluntary American measures to slow, but not halt, growth in emissions, saying the strict timetables of the treaty would have harmed the economy. He also said that global warming needed to be attacked by all countries. The treaty required no action by big developing countries like China and India, whose emissions could soon surpass those of wealthy countries. Most scientists agree that the main cause of a 50-year global warming trend is a rise in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, mainly carbon dioxide released by burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels. The warming is projected to affect ecosystems, agriculture, and coastlines around the world, with most of the harm focused in poor countries that are least able to build defenses.

At new talks on global warming in New Delhi, the United Nations official overseeing a 1992 climate treaty said the world was unlikely to achieve proposed reductions in heat-trapping gases unless the United States, the biggest source, cuts its emissions. President Bush has endorsed voluntary measures to slow growth in emissions, but not reduce them. The official, Joke Waller-Hunter, told Reuters, ''If you look at the current policies taken in the U.S., it's unlikely'' that targets set under the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 addendum to the treaty, will be met. The Kyoto pact was signed by the Clinton administration but rejected last year by Mr. Bush. Andrew C. Revkin (NYT)

European Union officials and environmentalists criticized two developments at talks in New Delhi aimed at curbing global warming. One was a retreat by Russia from its announced plans to speedily ratify the Kyoto protocol, the first to require cuts in heat-trapping gases. Russia's delegate said the details needed more study. The other issue was a draft declaration from negotiators halfway through the 10-day conference that appeared to reflect the views of the Bush administration, which rejected the pact last year. Without American participation, ratification by Russia is essential for the treaty to have legal force. Andrew C. Revkin (NYT)

Meeting the world's rising energy needs without increasing global warming will require a research effort as ambitious as the Apollo project to put a man on the moon. Meeting the world's rising energy needs without increasing global warming will require a research effort as ambitious as the Apollo project to put a man on the moon, a diverse group of scientists and engineers is reporting today. To supply energy needs 50 years from now without further influencing the climate, up to three times the total amount of energy now generated using coal, oil, and other fossil fuels will have to be produced using methods that generate no heat-trapping greenhouse gases, the scientists said in today's issue of the journal Science. In addition, they said, the use of fossil fuels will have to decline, and to achieve these goals research will have to begin immediately. Without prompt action, the atmosphere's concentration of greenhouse gases, mainly carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels, is expected to double from pre-industrial levels by the end of this century, the scientists said.''A broad range of intensive research and development is urgently needed to produce technological options that can allow both climate stabilization and economic development,''the team said. The researchers called for intensive new efforts to improve existing technologies and develop others like fusion reactors or space-based solar power plants. They did not estimate how much such a research effort would cost, but it is considered likely to run into tens of billions of dollars in government and private funds. The researchers, a team of 18 scientists from an array of academic, federal, and private research centers, said many options should be explored because some were bound to fail and success, somewhere, was essential. The researchers all work at institutions that might themselves benefit from increased energy research spending, but other experts not involved in the work said the new analysis was an important, and sobering, refinement of earlier projections. As they now exist, most energy technologies, the scientists said, ''have severe deficiencies.'' Solar panels, new nuclear power options, windmills, filters for fossil fuel emissions and other options are either inadequate or require vastly more research and development than is currently planned in the United States or elsewhere, they said. The assessment contrasts with an analysis of climate-friendly energy options made last year by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, an international panel of experts that works under United Nations auspices. That analysis concluded that existing technologies, diligently applied, would solve much of the problem. One author of the new analysis, Dr. Haroon S. Kheshgi, is a chemical engineer for Exxon Mobil, whose primary focus remains oil, which along with coal generates most of the carbon dioxide accumulating in the air from human activities. Still, Dr. Kheshgi said on Thursday that ''climate change is a serious risk'' requiring a shift away from fossil fuels. ''You need a quantum jump in technology,'' he said. ''What we're talking about here is a 50- to 100-year time scale.''Dr. Martin I. Hoffert, the lead author and a New York University physics professor, said he was convinced the technological hurdles could be overcome, but worried that the public and elected officials may not see the urgency. In interviews, several of the authors and other experts said there were few signs that major industrial nations were ready to engage in an ambitious quest for clean energy. Prof. Richard L. Schmalensee, a climate-policy expert and the dean of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan School of Management, said the issue of climate change remained too complex and contentious to generate the requisite focus. ''There is no substitute for political will,'' he said. The Bush administration has resisted sharp shifts in energy policy while Europe and Japan have accepted a climate treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, that includes binding deadlines for modest cuts in gas emissions. At international climate talks that end today in New Delhi, leaders of developing countries rejected limits on their fast-growing use of fossil fuels, saying rich countries should act first. President Bush has called for more research, led by the Energy Department, on many of the technologies examined in the new analysis. But some energy and climate experts said the extent of the challenge would likely require far more focus and money than now exists. Among the possibilities are space-based arrays of solar panels that might beam energy to earth using microwaves. The panel described various nuclear options, including the still-distant fusion option and new designs for fission-based power plants that might overcome limits on uranium and other fuels. Planting forests, which absorb carbon dioxide, cannot possibly keep up with the anticipated growth in energy use as developing countries become industrialized and as global population rises toward nine billion or more, the panel said. Some environmental campaigners criticized the study's focus on still-distant technologies, saying it could distract from the need to do what is possible now to reduce emissions of warming gases.''Techno-fixes are pipe dreams in many cases,'' said Kert Davies, research director for Greenpeace, which has been conducting a broad campaign against Exxon Mobil. ''The real solution,'' he said, ''is cutting the use of fossil fuels by any means necessary.''

When India's prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, finished speaking at the international conference on climate here on Wednesday, the fissure between richer and poorer countries over how best to tackle global warming could no longer be papered over. In his speech, he argued that poorer countries could not be expected to invest money in tackling the causes of global warming. They bear little responsibility, he said, producing fewer greenhouse gases than industrialized countries, and yet have been hit harder by the natural calamities, from drought to floods, caused by climate changes. They have weaker economies, and with pressing needs in everything from health to education, can little afford to invest in clean-air technologies. His speech articulated sentiments -- resentments, in some cases -- widely shared among developing nations. So while it produced little new of substance, the conference, the eighth since the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change was adopted in 1992, illuminated the challenges in crafting a global response to global warming. It highlighted a divide between north and south, between the industrialized and developing worlds, over who should bear the obligations and burdens of trying to reduce the emissions that cause global warming. But on several points, the south found itself with an unlikely ally: the United States, which under the Bush administration has also blanched at joining efforts to reduce emissions. Instead, the United States joined India and other developing countries in encouraging a focus on developing the technology and finding the resources to adapt to climate change. India and others argued that developed countries should offer technical and financial assistance to help developing countries adapt. It was not clear whether the conference's final declaration, which was still being negotiated this morning, would contain a reference to the Kyoto Protocol, the 1997 climate pact completed last year and endorsed by most of the world's countries. The Bush administration had rejected the pact, saying that fulfilling its requirements to reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases could hurt America's economy. The United States is the largest producer of greenhouse gases, and many believe its rejection of the pact has undercut its potential effectiveness. A draft declaration drawn up earlier this week did not mention Kyoto at all. But the latest version included an innocuous reference that said that parties that have ratified the protocol should encourage those that have not to do so ''in a timely manner.''The pact must be ratified by at least 55 countries and by the industrialized nations that emitted at least 55 percent of the industrialized world's carbon dioxide in 1990. With the United States out, that number can only be reached if Russia ratifies the treaty. At the conference, the Russian delegation indicated that ratification was eventually likely, but only after Parliament passed a law in favor of ratification. If Russia has been hesitant about ratifying the Kyoto pact because of the withdrawal of the United States, India may have been emboldened by America's rejection of formal commitments to reduce emissions of warming gases.''We do not see targets and timetables as realistic for developing countries,'' the head of the American delegation, Paula Dobriansky, the under secretary of state for global affairs, said in an interview today. Instead, the American delegation here repeatedly sounded two themes: that adapting to climate change is as essential as preventing it, and that economic growth is the key to environmental progress. The European Union and Japan, accordingly, have been pressing developing nations to commit to reducing the emission of warming gases. But it was exactly such pressures that seem to have contributed to the estrangement between north and south. A member of the Indian delegation said that the pressure from the European Union and Japan had crossed the line from ''persuasion'' to ''aggression.'' Mr. Vajpayee's speech was partly in response.

Environmental issues could yet make the difference in several tight races, Colorado and New Hampshire among them. But its national impact is not nearly what it was in 1996, when voters hammered Newt Gingrich and his Contract With America Republicans for similar transgressions -- even though Mr. Bush's indifference to the environment is every bit as worrisome as Mr. Gingrich's. Environmental issues are not resonating with voters in this midterm election the way they usually do. Environmental issues are not resonating with voters in this midterm election the way they usually do. This is as much a rebuke to the Democrats as it is a tribute to the administration's ability to hide its assault on the rules protecting the nation's natural resources under the political radar. According to the polls, the environment commands voter interest about on a par with taxes, above crime and corporate malfeasance but below the economy, education and health care. Environmental issues could yet make the difference in several tight races, Colorado and New Hampshire among them. But its national impact is not nearly what it was in 1996, when voters hammered Newt Gingrich and his Contract With America Republicans for similar transgressions -- even though Mr. Bush's indifference to the environment is every bit as worrisome as Mr. Gingrich's. There are several reasons for this. One, of course, is the talk of war with Iraq, which has taken the wind out of nearly everything. A second is the miserable failure of the Democrats to take a stand on the issue, as Bill Clinton alertly did in 1996. One hears periodic complaints about Mr. Bush from important members of the Senate committee on the environment like James Jeffords and Joseph Lieberman, but there has been nothing resembling a sustained Democratic counterattack. Another reason is the clever way Mr. Bush has pursued his anti-environmental agenda. Except on the matter of global warming, when he stood up and openly repudiated the Kyoto Protocol, the president has stayed in the shadows -- leaving it to his cabinet officers to chip away, administratively and in the courts, at the various rules and regulations that his allies and political contributors in the oil, gas, mining, timber and other extractive industries find so annoying. These sorties have done real damage. The Interior Department, for example, continues its relentless search for oil and gas in places like Utah and Wyoming without regard to the fragility of the landscape or the niceties of the law. The same department has reversed Clinton-era regulations imposing stricter standards on mining operations. The Corps of Engineers has weakened protections for streams and wetlands. Most of President Clinton's forest protection program is now at risk -- including his plans to protect 60 million roadless acres from commercial activity, to enlarge protections for old-growth forests in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska's Tongass National Forest, and to manage forest lands in ways that give greater weight to environmental values. Collectively, however, these actions -- scattered across government, hidden in obscure courtrooms -- have not coalesced into a decisive political issue. There is no time to make them one before Election Day. Still, there's a lesson here for Democrats. Unless they start challenging Mr. Bush's agenda in a serious, coordinated fashion, his policies will sail on with minimum resistance.

The global climate is changing in big ways, probably because of human actions, and it is time to focus on adapting to the impacts instead of just fighting to limit the warming. That, in a nutshell, was the idea that dominated the latest round of international climate talks, which ended on Friday in New Delhi. While many scientists have long held this view, it was a striking departure for the policy makers at the talks -- the industry lobbyists, environmental activists and government officials. For more than a decade, their single focus had been the fight over whether to cut smokestack and tailpipe emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases. Many environmentalists had long avoided discussing adaptation for fear it would smack of defeatism. Experts espousing the views of industry were thrilled with the shift in New Delhi.''By building capabilities to deal with climate change, we'll be much better off than by just paying attention to global warming,'' said Myron Ebell, who directs climate policy for the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a private group that opposes regulatory approaches to environmental problems. Although they conceded its importance, environmental campaigners said an approach that focused on adapting to climate change rather than preventing it would inevitably fail, because the impact of unfettered emissions would eventually exceed people's ability to adjust. Moreover, many said, coral reefs, alpine forests and other fragile ecosystems -- without the resiliency of human societies -- would simply be unable to cope with fast-changing conditions. The change in attitude, expressed in the negotiations and in a formal declaration adopted Friday, has been partly driven by unusual weather this year -- record floods in Europe, landslides in the Himalayas, searing drought in southern Asia and Africa. No single weather event can be linked to human-caused warming. But as the costs of weather-related disasters rise, unease about climate change rises, too. So far this year, unusual weather is blamed for 9,400 deaths and $56 billion in damage, according to the United Nations and insurers, and deaths and costs have been rising for years. Another impetus is the rising realization that many significant shifts have already been set in motion by a century-long accumulation of warming gases. Even if emissions stopped today, some experts say, the volume of greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere would slowly raise sea levels for a century or two as warmed water expands and terrestrial ice melts. The result would be coastal erosion and salt water intrusion into water supplies. The new focus suits the agendas of the Bush administration and many developing countries, which for different reasons want to avoid cutting emissions of the warming gases. But some environmental campaigners say the shift will discourage efforts to cut dependence on fossil fuels like coal and oil, the main source of the offending gases, in favor of building dikes, designing hardier crops or other engineering fixes.''Adaptation is like the 'wear sunglasses and a hat' theory of fighting ozone depletion,'' said Kert Davies, the research director for Greenpeace, referring to the Reagan-era debate over chemicals that were weakening the earth's atmospheric shield against harmful radiation. In that case, the offending synthetic chemicals were banned under a 1987 treaty, but only because damage to the ozone layer had become vividly apparent in satellite images -- and because industry had come up with alternatives. But no ready substitutes exist for cheap, plentiful fossil fuels. Many experts say the use of coal and oil is bound to keep rising for decades, particularly as poor countries climb the economic ladder from bicycles and water buckets to cars and washing machines. Conservative policy analysts said proposed curbs on fuel use were thus unrealistic and unjustified, while making countries more resilient to extremes of weather made sense for many reasons. One goal, Mr. Ebell said, should be to enable low-lying countries like Bangladesh to respond to typhoons the way Florida responds to hurricanes. There are also ways to foster development in poor countries that limit harm from climate change. Experts say that in semi-arid zones in Africa and Asia, agricultural assistance could improve farmers' ability to endure heat and drought. In some areas, adaptation is already under way. In the Himalayas, some communities, with the help of the United Nations, are installing alarm systems to warn of flash floods as expanding lakes of glacial meltwater grow to the bursting point in the next decade. Low-lying island nations, like the Maldives in the Indian Ocean, have been watching the slow rise of the seas for decades and have not only been planning to build storm barriers, but possibly to evacuate entirely at some point. The emphasis on adapting is a profound turnabout from the course set a decade ago after President George Bush and other world leaders signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Though that treaty and subsequent addenda contained vague commitments by industrial nations to help vulnerable countries adapt, the emphasis was always about curbing emissions to prevent dangerous changes in the climate system. Adaptation got support in New Delhi because it suits both the current Bush administration, which has tried to shift debate away from emissions reductions, and developing countries, which have expressed frustration at the developed world's inertia in limiting its own emissions and its delays in pledged aid. At the meeting, poorer countries did not quite say it was their turn to pollute but, led by the host country, they did demand the right to grow out of destitution, a path that will require vast use of existing fuel reserves -- mainly coal. Opening the plenary session last Wednesday, India's prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, said per capita use of such fuels by the world's poorest populations was a fraction of that of people in the industrial powers. Mitigating fuel use, he said, ''will bring additional strain to the already fragile economies of the developing countries.''The adaptation issue also got support from a new scientific analysis, published Friday, suggesting that the only way to safely stabilize greenhouse gases by midcentury was with a hugely ambitious Apollo-size research program on fusion, solar power, and other nonpolluting energy sources. The lead authors of that study echoed other experts in saying it was nearly inconceivable that the Bush administration or Congress would finance such a costly crash program. They also said that modest emission reductions called for under the Kyoto Protocol, a climate treaty supported by Europe and Japan, would not be enough to spur governments and businesses to seek the necessary technological shift. The protocol, an addendum to the 1992 climate convention, is moving toward taking legal force sometime next year, when Russia is expected to ratify it. But President Bush has rejected it, and without the adherence of the United States, the world's biggest source of greenhouse gases, the Kyoto pact's impact on climate will be negligible, scientists and treaty experts say. Still, some experts said Kyoto's significance should not be discounted. ''Your first trip to the gym doesn't improve your health, but you've got to get into a regular habit,'' said David D. Doniger, the director of climate policy for the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private group. ''Kyoto is that first trip. It provides a structure to build on.''Mr. Doniger and other veterans of the climate wars with varying perspectives said the best -- and perhaps only -- hope lay in a blend of all of the above: a mix of finding ways to improve energy efficiency now; to protect the most vulnerable countries and ecosystems from accelerating change; and to push the technological frontier to determine if any far-flung solutions can come to the rescue. Dr. Martin I. Hoffert, the New York University physicist who led the new clean-energy study, said he was confident that technology held an eventual solution. ''We started World War II with biplanes, and seven years later had jets,'' he said. But he and other climate experts acknowledged that wartime innovations emerged in crisis, not ahead of a slow-moving environmental shift.

When Canadian oil executives get together with politicians and investors these days, the talk is less likely to be about drilling results or royalties than about climate change. The oil executives have become the most outspoken critics in Canada of plans by Prime Minister Jean Chrtien to ratify the Kyoto Protocol, the 1997 pact that calls for developed nations to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, which most scientists consider the main cause of global warming. The Canadian Parliament began debating the treaty today, and ratification is likely by mid-December. Mr. Chrtien's ruling Liberal Party has a large majority in the House of Commons, and opinion polls indicate that the Kyoto treaty enjoys wide support among Canadians. But the oil industry -- strongly backed by Ralph Klein, the premier of Alberta, the main oil- and gas-producing province -- says Kyoto is a threat. It says the cost of complying will make it hard for Canadian companies to compete or to attract new investment. The government responded last week by significantly modifying its proposals for putting the treaty into effect. FirstEnergy Capital of Calgary said in a report today that the changes, which include extending deadlines for companies that have trouble finding the capital or the technology to meet emission targets, ''will make implementation less onerous to oil and gas producers than first thought.''The Kyoto treaty takes effect after it has been ratified by 55 countries, which must include developed nations accounting for at least 55 percent of that group's 1990 carbon monoxide emissions. Some 97 countries have approved so far, but most of them are small, and they represent only about 37 percent of the required emissions total. Canada would raise the figure to about 41 percent. With the Bush administration opposed to the treaty, the most important nation considering ratification is Russia, which would raise the emissions figure by 17.4 percent, enough to bring it into force. The White House opposes the Kyoto protocol because it argues that the treaty's binding limits on greenhouse-gas emissions could harm the American economy and because fast-growing economic powers like China and India are exempted. The Canadian oil executives say Canada would bear a disproportionately heavy burden if it is the only country in the Western Hemisphere bound by the emission targets, as now seems likely. Several companies have recently said the treaty was the reason they had decided to scale back some operations in Canada. Earlier this month, Canadian Natural Resources of Calgary said it was reducing the 2003 capital budget for its Horizon oil-sands project in northern Alberta by one-third, or 100 million Canadian dollars ($63.4 million), ''pending clarification of the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol.''Analysts expect that oil-sands projects will be hit hardest because turning bitumen, a thick form of petroleum, into oil yields a relatively large amount of pollution. Under the Kyoto accord, Canada would have to reduce its emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases by 6 percent from 1990 levels annually from 2008 to 2012. But that figure understates the true scale of the reduction required in Canada because emissions have grown significantly since 1990. Canadian companies could offset emissions by buying ''credits'' from countries like Russia and Germany, where closings of old, inefficient plants have already reduced emissions from 1990 levels. That provision, too, has rankled energy executives. Gwyn Morgan, chief executive of EnCana, one of western Canada's biggest oil and gas producers, asked in a recent speech to the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, ''At a time when we have run out of money to fund health care, why would we sign up to slow down our economy and to send money to Russia for credits?''Gregory Pardy, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs in New York, called the Kyoto Protocol ''a national public issue'' for Canadians. ''It creates uncertainty for American fund managers making investments in Canada,'' Mr. Pardy said. ''What is not clear at the moment is what the distribution of costs will be between shareholders and Canadian taxpayers.''FirstEnergy Capital has said the six companies with the most to worry about are Canadian Natural Resources, Canadian Oil Sands Trust, the Imperial Oil unit of Exxon Mobil, Shell Canada, Suncor Energy and Western Oil Sands. As an alternative to Kyoto, the energy executives are pushing for a ''made in Canada'' solution to global warming -- one that would include ''sensible emission improvement targets with regulatory backstops,'' according to Pierre R. Alvarez, president of the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers.''It's not a question of doing something or doing nothing,'' he said. Many oil and gas producers say they are already making progress in reducing emissions. Petro-Canada, for instance, estimates that it has eliminated more than 1.2 million metric tons of greenhouse-gas pollutants since 1990, the equivalent of taking 150,000 full-size cars off the road each year. The government estimated last month that the cost of meeting the Kyoto targets would be 3 Canadian cents a barrel for conventional crude oil, and 10 to 12 Canadian cents a barrel for oil produced from oil sands. The extra cost to motorists would be a small fraction of 1 cent a gallon. Based on these estimates, Tyler Dann, an energy analyst at Banc of America Securities in Houston, said that ratification of the treaty ''does not seem to be a big deal at all.''Even some energy companies are taking a conciliatory approach. ''We'll align with whatever governments determine to be the public interest,'' said Gordon Lambert, vice president for sustainable development at Suncor Energy, which owns one of the biggest oil-sands operations and is one of a handful of oil companies not opposing the treaty. Mr. Lambert said Suncor would have little trouble meeting the Kyoto targets. The company has already cut its emissions 42 percent from 1990 levels, and it plans to spend 100 million Canadian dollars on alternative and renewable energy projects from 2000 to 2005. Among other things, Suncor has built a power plant fired by natural gas for its oil-sands operation. Mr. Dann, the Houston analyst, said the Canadian oil industry's opposition was partly posturing. The profitability of some oil-sands projects is currently threatened by cost overruns and by a predicted North American surplus of the type of oil they produce. ''Those companies could be using Kyoto as an excuse to back away from projects that might not go ahead anyway,'' Mr. Dann said.

Every so often a report comes out of a remote part of the world that is so shocking it makes us sit bolt upright and start thinking hard about global warming. Now it is news from the Bolivian Andes, where glaciers more than three miles above sea level are retreating with alarming speed, creating the threat of potentially disastrous water shortages. According to a story last week by The Times's Juan Forero, the glacier on Chacaltaya Mountain, which claims the world's highest ski slope, has been shriveling so fast that scientists predict its disappearance in 10 years. Chacaltaya Mountain is hardly alone. Shrinking glaciers are a worldwide phenomenon. Great slices of snow and ice are disappearing in places from the Austrian Alps to Glacier National Park in Montana, where the number of glaciers has declined from 150 a century ago to 35 today. In 30 years, there may be none in the park at all. The tropical glaciers of the Andes seem to be retreating more quickly than any others. Some scientists have warned of a calamity in the making because countries like Bolivia and Peru depend on glaciers and the rain and snow that fall in the mountains for drinking water, for irrigating fields and for generating electricity. There appear to be two reasons for the crisis. One is a series of unseasonably dry years attributed to El Nio, the name given to the weather pattern generated by warm Pacific currents off the South American coast. El Nio has occurred with abnormal frequency in the last 20 years. The other is climate change. In Bolivia, the average temperature has risen by 1 degree Celsius in the last century, mirroring changes in some other parts of the world. That may not seem like much, but it is enough to cause environmental havoc. This unsettling news could have a bright side if it persuaded the Bush administration to pay more attention to the global warming issue. A report early last month from 18 leading scientists, published in the journal Science, called for a concentrated national effort -- equal to the Apollo moon landing project -- to develop energy sources other than fossil fuels. Most scientists now believe that the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil has contributed heavily to the warming trend. But just two weeks later, the Bush administration called for further research into the causes of global warming. Given the degree of consensus on the issue, the research project looks like just one more excuse for inaction from a president who shocked the world early in his tenure by reneging on a campaign promise to regulate carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas, and by renouncing the Kyoto agreement on global climate change. But in view of the sobering news from places like the Andes, it is hard to imagine that Mr. Bush can sustain his casual attitude much longer.

On Tuesday, the Bush administration convenes a three-day meeting here to set its new agenda for research on climate change. But many climate experts who will attend say talking about more research will simply delay decisions that need to be made now to avert serious harm from global warming. President Bush has called for a decade of research before anything beyond voluntary measures is used to stem tailpipe and smokestack emissions of heat-trapping gases that scientists say are contributing to global warming.''When you're speeding down the road in your car, if you've got to turn around and go the other direction, the first thing is to slow down, then stop, then turn,'' said David K. Garman, the assistant secretary of energy for energy efficiency and renewable energy. But many climate experts say the perennial need for more study can no longer justify further delays in emission cuts.''Waiting 10 years to decide is itself a decision which may remove from the table certain options for stabilizing concentrations later,'' said Dr. Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geosciences at Princeton. For example, under today's rate of emissions growth, he and other experts say that certain losses are already probable, including dwindling of snow-dependent water supplies and global die-offs of vulnerable ecosystems like coral reefs, alpine meadows and certain coastal marshes. Nevertheless, administration officials say further research is still necessary because scientists cannot say exactly what effects human activity will have on global climate and how dangerous they will be. It is worth taking the time to conduct more analysis at least to clarify the balance of environmental and economic risks, they say.''Science rarely gives enough information to narrow policy choices to a single option, but it can clear away some of the underbrush,'' said Dr. John H. Marburger III, assistant to the president for science and technology. Some energy and climate experts have run new kinds of analyses showing that there is still time to avoid the worst effects of climate change while also limiting economic costs involved with an abrupt shift from fossil fuels, the main source of the warming gases. The meeting, involving hundreds of experts, will be the biggest public airing of arguments in many years. Most scientists concur on the basics. Atmospheric levels of the heat-trapping gases, mainly carbon dioxide from burning coal and oil, have increased by more than a third since the start of the Industrial Revolution, and there is wide agreement that they will probably double from preindustrial concentrations by the end of the century, driven by energy demands of developing countries. International and American panels of experts have concluded that these gases have caused most of the warming trend over the last 50 years. But there is still a wide range of projections indicating how much warmer things may get, how storm and drought patterns may respond and what the effects will be on ecosystems, agriculture and health. These uncertainties are unlikely to be dispelled soon. But many climate experts say that some effects can reasonably be predicted and that prudence calls for more action now. Dr. Warren M. Washington, a senior scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, likened the situation to the debate over smoking's link to cancer.''Even with smoking, it's still basically a statistical thing,'' said Dr. Washington, who is chairman of the National Science Board, a panel that advises the White House and Congress. ''But vested interests do not want to take action based on early indications, and with climate early indications is what we have.''If greenhouse gas concentrations double, climate experts expect substantial disruptions of ecosystems and water supplies, coastal damage as sea levels rise and intensified drought and downpour cycles. Even more calamitous surprises could lie in store, including disruptions in the Atlantic Ocean currents that help warm Europe. The experts concede that they cannot say exactly what may happen, or when. Also, changes will probably occur slowly -- sea levels rising by millimeters a year, say -- so there will be no one event to prompt people to choose a fuel-saving hybrid car over a gas-guzzling S.U.V.But the warming will have enormous momentum, they say. Unlike soot or sulfur pollution, which falls out of the atmosphere within days or weeks, molecules of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases can circulate for a century or more. As a result, scientists say, allowing things to go on as they are is like making minimum payments on a credit card while still using it: the balance grows and grows. In the long run, almost all experts agree, stabilizing carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere will be a century-plus process that will necessitate eliminating -- or capturing -- all releases of carbon dioxide from burning coal, oil and other fossil fuels. That will require a fundamental shift to energy technologies that do not yet exist. But it also requires emission cuts in the next decade or so, even as trends for such emissions are sharply up.''We will probably need everything in the tool kit to cut emissions enough to stop the worst things from happening,'' said David D. Doniger, the director of climate policy for the Natural Resources Defense Council, a private group. ''A long-term technology program is definitely in order, but we also need to be acting now with the technology available now.''But the Bush administration is resisting calls for quick action. Its focus on more research comes straight from the president. In his first speech on climate, in June 2001, Mr. Bush defended the need for more research by saying, ''No one can say with any certainty what constitutes a dangerous level of warming, and therefore what level must be avoided.''In February, he reaffirmed the country's commitment to pursue the goal of a climate treaty his father signed in 1992: to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations at a level that will prevent dangerous interference with the climate. But he has rejected the instrument chosen by almost all other industrialized countries to start on a path toward that goal, the 1997 agreement called the Kyoto Protocol. It requires industrialized countries that submit to its terms to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by 2012 to levels below those measured in 1990. Instead, Mr. Bush calls for voluntary actions. Ten years from now, if scientists still think climate change is worrisome, other strategies may follow, he said. Although many climate experts say delays are risky, others, including Dr. James A. Edmonds of the Energy Department's Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, have calculated that Mr. Bush's timetable and prompter actions like the Kyoto treaty do not lead to significantly different outcomes in the long run. The most critical challenge by far, he said, is the sharp decline in emissions in midcentury.''We are still struggling with the 'what will be' question, especially at regional scales, which makes answering the 'what will be dangerous' question too difficult to handle,'' said one of these researchers, Dr. John R. Christy, the director of the Earth System Science Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. As a result, he said, any emissions plan should be ''economically benign.''The meeting this week is likely to see many clashes between the two camps, with more than 1,000 scientists, industry lobbyists, environmental campaigners and others planning to weigh in. Sam Thernstrom, a spokesman for the White House Council on Environmental Quality, says the goal is to hear all views before the research plan is finished next spring and a series of two-  to five-year projects is begun.''Anyone who has quibbled with how this plan is put together,'' he said, ''they and the rest of the world are invited to come on down and make suggestions. All ideas will be considered.''Those eager for more aggressive actions say they doubt the meeting will lead to significant policy shifts, particularly now that relevant Congressional committees are controlled by Republicans pushing for more, not less, exploitation of fossil fuels. They also say that the administration's 170-page research plan (available on the Web at www. climatescience. gov) includes no commitments that adequate money will flow to support new science. To build a more convincing case for faster action, a growing group of researchers is trying new ways of conveying the risks of certain emissions paths, including pinpointing when actions have to start to stabilize greenhouse gases at particular levels. The current concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is 370 parts per million, and the level before industrialization began was about 280 parts per million. Under what is considered a best-case model, global annual emissions of carbon dioxide will have to start declining by 2020 to stabilize atmospheric carbon dioxide at 450 parts per million. Even at that level, there would probably be substantial losses, Dr. Oppenheimer and others say, including a global die-off of coral reefs. Societies have probably already missed that turning point, scientists say, and the longer societies wait to act, the higher the eventual greenhouse plateau and the greater the consequences. If emissions do not start declining until 2033, carbon dioxide concentrations will plateau at 550 parts per million -- more than double preindustrial concentrations. That level raises the likelihood of more calamitous consequences, including intensified storm and drought cycles, wider extinction of species and perhaps the eventual freeing of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, which could raise sea levels a century or two from now 15 feet or more, inundating coasts where most human settlements are concentrated. In between these extremes, some climate experts and economists see a path that could avoid the worst environmental and economic risks. The problem is that this would depend on a fairly prompt start on emission reductions and aggressive research on finding new sources of nonpolluting energy. There are other reasons for prompt action, experts say. One is that energy providers like power plant owners plan their investments in new equipment a decade or two ahead of time, said Dr. David G. Victor, the director of the energy and sustainable development program at Stanford. Another problem with relying on more research, many climate experts say, is the presumption that the extra effort will reveal a ''safe'' level of greenhouse gases. Better computer models and observations are likely to refine the menu of impacts, but reducing uncertainty still ''doesn't necessarily provide what is needed by decision makers,'' said Dr. Roger A. Pielke Jr., an expert on environmental risk at the University of Colorado. Society as a whole must answer those questions, he and other scientists say.''To avoid danger implies a threshold,'' said Dr. Henry D. Jacoby, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and co-director of its program on the science and policy of global change. ''But with climate, I don't believe there is one.''''There are so many different effects, in so many different countries, in so many different sectors, affecting so many different processes, affecting so many different people in so many different situations that there's not going to be a clearly defined break point,'' Dr. Jacoby said. Dr. Jacoby likened the situation to a doctor-patient conference, when the patient learns that his high cholesterol puts him at risk for a heart attack.''Is your next question 'Tell me exactly when my heart attack is coming and how serious it will be?' '' Dr. Jacoby said. ''No. You want to know what you can do about it now.''Correction:  December 6, 2002, Friday  A label and a caption for a satellite image in Science Times on Tuesday with an article about the prospects for government action on climate change referred incorrectly to an area off the Bahamas where coral reefs are threatened by global warming. Most of the area, the Great Bahama Bank, is sand under shallow water. It is not entirely coral reef. Correction: December 6, 2002, FridayA label and a caption for a satellite image in Science Times on Tuesday with an article about the prospects for government action on climate change referred incorrectly to an area off the Bahamas where coral reefs are threatened by global warming. Most of the area, the Great Bahama Bank, is sand under shallow water. It is not entirely coral reef.<br><br>

Facing criticism over the pace and focus of the president's policy on global warming, Bush administration officials said today that future scientific findings could speed consideration of more aggressive actions to rein in emissions of heat-trapping gases. Last year, President Bush set a climate policy that until 2012 would rely on voluntary measures by industries to slow growth in emissions of carbon dioxide and the other heat-trapping gases. He said more research was needed to clarify the potential environmental risks of warming before stronger measures were taken. The possibility that that pace could quicken was conveyed by White House officials on the first day of a three-day meeting convened by the administration to devise a research plan for clarifying climate hazards and devising technologies to end emissions of heat-trapping, or greenhouse, gases altogether.''I fully expect there will be findings in the climate and technology research initiatives that will affect policy before 2012,'' said Dr. John H. Marburger III, the assistant to the president for science and technology.''This administration is open to facts,'' Dr. Marburger said, ''and the better the scientific case is for doing something, the more likely there is to be policy changes. This is not an administration that shuts off its ears and its common sense. That's why we're doing this.''More than 1,200 officials, scientists, industry lobbyists, environmental campaigners and contractors eager for new contracts for satellites and sensors packed sessions on monitoring of oceans and air and refining computer simulations of those complicated realms. The administration has been increasingly criticized over its climate policy, even though Mr. Bush last year accepted findings by a panel of American experts that most of the global warming in recent decades had been caused by human activity. Almost all other industrialized countries are supporting a treaty, the Kyoto Protocol, that would require them to reduce gas emissions below 1990 levels by 2012. The treaty awaits ratification by Russia to take legal effect. Russian leaders have pledged to do so next year. One of several European environmental officials at today's meeting said the administration's targets for slowing the increase in emissions were ''timid'' compared with trends that were already sharply dipping emissions curves in Britain. In an address at the meeting, Dr. G. O. P. Obasi, secretary general of the World Meteorological Organization, welcomed further American research, but said action was also required to cut the risk of harm from warming, some of which was already becoming evident.''We should seek to improve our scientific knowledge of climate variability and change while at the same time striving to insure that the environmental and socioeconomic conditions of present and future generations are not put at serious risk,'' Dr. Obasi said. Some Democrats, among them Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who has made Mr. Bush's environment and energy policies issues in his possible presidential campaign, characterized the meeting as a public relations ploy.''No one will mistake another administration dog-and-pony show for real leadership,'' Mr. Kerry said in a statement. Dr. Marburger and top officials from the Energy and Commerce Departments said the United States retained the global lead, by far, in climate research and was committed to significantly slowing emissions rates in the short term and eliminating emissions in the long run. A final four-year research plan is to be issued in April.

Last March, Lord John Browne, the group chief executive of the British oil giant BP, gave a speech at Stanford University. Had you stumbled into the auditorium partway through, you might be forgiven for assuming the man at the podium was not an oil baron, an industrialist, an extractor of fossil fuels from the tender earth but an environmentalist of the high church calling for the abolition of hydrocarbons, the very substance that had made his company and himself so fabulously rich. His subject was global climate change -- in particular, the process by which humans, by burning oil and gas, have been slowly, perhaps irreversibly, warming the earth's atmosphere. And instead of hewing to the line of industry, instead of calling (as President Bush and the head of Exxon Mobil have) for caution and further research, he said, ''I believe the American people expect a company like BP . . . to offer answers and not excuses.'' He also said, ''Climate change is an issue which raises fundamental questions about the relationship between companies and society as a whole, and between one generation and the next.'' He even said, ''Companies composed of highly skilled and trained people can't live in denial of mounting evidence gathered by hundreds of the most reputable scientists in the world.''Around the time Browne was at Stanford, sounding strikingly unlike an oil executive, BP was trying its own kind of identity shift, sounding strikingly unlike an oil company. Two years earlier, at a cost of $200 million, it began an enormous corporate rebranding exercise, shortening its name from British Petroleum to BP, coining the slogan ''Beyond Petroleum'' and redesigning its corporate insignia. Out went the old British Petroleum shield that had been a familiar image in Britain for more than 70 years, and in came a green, yellow and white sunburst that seemed to suggest a warm and fuzzy feeling about the earth. BP press officers were careful not to explain exactly what ''Beyond Petroleum'' meant, but the slogan, coupled with the cheerful sunburst, sent the message that the company was looking past oil and gas toward a benign, eco-friendly future of solar and renewable energy. New Yorkers in particular were the target of a high-saturation ad campaign that felt, at times, like an overfriendly stranger putting his arm around you in a bar. In Times Square, a huge billboard went up, reading if only we could harness the energy of new york city. Then the stranger, perhaps feeling the need to explain his intentions, went on: solar, natural gas, wind, hydrogen. and oh yes, oil. Finally, the stranger took his arm away with a bit of a shrug: it's a start. BP's print and TV ad campaign, which is winding down this month, represents one of the most dazzlingly high-profile corporate P.R. efforts in recent years. Created by Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, it aspires to a conversational, almost confidential voice that suggests, You know what oil companies do to the environment, and we do, too, but honestly, we're not like that at all. ''People are skeptical of oil companies -- go figure!'' says Jennifer Ruys, director of external affairs for BP. ''And the ad campaign was designed to get at that skepticism.'' As the billboards announce: BP was ''the first oil company to publicly recognize the risks of global climate change.'' BP ''believes in alternative energy. Like solar and cappuccino.'' BP has joined forces with New York's Urban Park Rangers to, of all things, release four bald eagles into the wilds of Upper Manhattan. At the end of each ad was the same winking tag line: ''It's a start.''Based in London, BP is the world's second-largest oil company (after Exxon Mobil), with gross revenues of $174 billion and 15,500 service stations in the United States. It operates in more than 100 countries and produces almost 3.5 billion barrels of oil and gas a year. Largely, this has been the handiwork of Lord Browne, who became group chief executive in 1995 (and was knighted 3 years later) and followed his own ascension by quickly expanding the once midsize company into a huge multinational. In 1999, BP merged with Amoco in a deal worth $140 billion; a year later, it bought Atlantic Richfield for $27 billion. These megadeals have more than paid for themselves. At press time, BP shares were trading at $38, which is an 80 percent increase since Browne's rise to power seven years ago. If Browne, 54, has made a name for himself as a high-stakes deal maker, he has also shown that he is alert to the dangers of heading a colossal oil company in a world that -- because of climate change, murmurings of war-for-oil and a host of other global crises -- may hate oil companies, no matter how profitable they are. More than that, he has shown the ambition to redefine the very nature of Big Oil: pushing BP to confront global warming, candidly acknowledge the company's mistakes (environmental penalties against the company appear on its Web site), enter into dialogue with environmental groups, hire people with strong environmental ethics and opinions. ''John Browne would be the first to say, 'Even on our best day, we're still a big dirty company,''' says one person involved in BP's rebranding effort. ''But aren't there ways to do it smarter, cleaner, in a more surprising and forward-thinking way?''' He adds, ''This guy's swimming upstream.''BP's multimillion-dollar campaign is the public face of Browne's convictions. At a time when anxiety over dependence on Middle Eastern oil has sent other energy companies scurrying for cover, BP is rushing to center stage, betting that, as Michael Kaye, who worked on the campaign as an associate creative director at Ogilvy, puts it, ''BP can be a friend -- listening to consumers, speaking in a human voice.'' BP is also betting that this will gain them a competitive advantage in the marketplace, that it will convince consumers that BP is, in the words of Anna Catalano, group vice president for marketing, ''the company that goes beyond what you expect from an oil company -- frank, open, honest and unapologetic.'' BP is the only oil company right now risking a huge advertising presence in this oil-wary culture. And this may turn out to be the richest deal of all. But to persuade the public that BP is no rapacious multinational, that it is instead an organization thinking first and foremost of the public good, may not come so easily as long as BP remains an oil company, deriving the vast majority of its profits from the black stuff that -- from drilling rig to oil tanker to refinery to gas station -- scars the earth, pollutes the air and eventually warms the planet. And once the company tried to convey its new identity in billboard form, the contradiction only deepened. How can an oil company be ''Beyond Petroleum'' without actively distancing itself from its core product, and how can a company that digs big holes in the ground possibly advertise itself as a sensitive steward of the environment? BP's rebranding campaign caused fits, not only in the environmental movement, which saw it as the highest form of hypocrisy, but also within the company itself, which embraced and then disavowed its P.R. message so many times that people began to wonder if the company was beyond petroleum or merely beyond belief. The Independent of London, a vigilant BP-watcher, concluded that the company was ''brimming with success, gushing with money, and very much wanting to be liked. Yet its image is confused, and its reputation is on the line as never before.''But its biggest challenge may come years, perhaps decades, from now, when the world turns to other forms of energy -- in part because of dwindling oil supplies but mainly because of the mounting and unimpeachable evidence that we have a profound carbon problem on our hands; that even if we discover billions of new barrels of oil in the ground, we cannot keep burning them -- and pumping vast amounts of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases into the atmosphere -- without potentially catastrophic consequences. According to the latest findings of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in order to stabilize greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, global emissions must be reduced to at least 60 percent below 1990 levels. That is a radical change in the way the world uses energy. And to accomplish that, many people feel, will require nothing less than a new industrial revolution, an overwhelming retreat from society's mass reliance on the carbon fuels -- oil, gas and coal -- that have powered the global economy for more than a hundred years. Browne is uncomfortable speculating about a future completely without oil. ''My view is that hydrocarbons will be the bulk of the energy supply for the next 30 to 50 years,'' he said when I met him last spring. But clearly Browne is trying to prepare BP for the end of the fossil-fuel game -- by cutting the emissions of carbon dioxide that it creates while producing oil and gas, by shifting to cleaner fuels like natural gas, which emits about half the volume of CO2 generated from coal and ultimately by positioning itself as a producer of alternative and renewable energy: hydrogen, wind, solar. But whether the company -- which made its fortunes in the oil fields of Iran and later on the North Slope of Alaska -- can survive the shift to a new energy economy remains an open question. ''That's a huge level of wishful thinking,'' says one American scientist who has advised BP's senior management on climate change and renewable energy. ''Of course they say they see themselves that way, and of course they're going to try. But whether they will have any chance of successfully outcompeting newcomers in renewable energy is a very big question. Because historically, once those transformations have happened, the existing companies have not held the edge. These companies, some of which have existed for a hundred years, are essentially about extracting petroleum. And in a world where you don't extract petroleum anymore, the first order of expectation is that you're dead.''The Dalton highway is a two-lane gravel road that runs some 400 miles from Fairbanks, Alaska, to the coast of the Arctic Ocean. Built by BP with a consortium of other oil companies after the huge 1968 strike at Prudhoe Bay, it has been open to the public for more than 10 years. After the highway, known as the Haul Road, descends the north slope of the Brooks Range, it begins to cross the open, boggy tundra of the Arctic coastal plain. Gradually, as the landscape grows prairie flat, natural objects lose their dominance and industrial ones take their place: pipelines, pump stations, piles of gravel. By the time you reach Prudhoe Bay, industry has completely consumed the view: wellheads, compressor stations, seawater processing plants, roads, flares, landing strips and overhead power lines stretch as far as the eye can see. Here, some 200 miles north of the Arctic Circle, in the middle of a vast boreal wilderness, is one of the largest industrial developments in the world. Browne had overseen the company's Alaska division for many years, and when he became group chief executive in 1995, he revealed himself to be one oil man who did not believe that the oil business could -- or should -- go on as it had before. Soft-spoken and slightly built, with a manner more befitting a university lecture hall than an offshore oil rig, Browne consulted with dozens of scientists and took what he describes as a ''deep dive'' into the confusing, sometimes contradictory science of global warming. Back then, BP (along with Exxon Mobil, Royal Dutch/Shell and a few other oil companies) was still a member of the Global Climate Coalition, an international lobbying group set up specifically to cast skepticism on climate-change science and, later, to undermine support for the Kyoto Protocol, the international pact in which industrialized nations agreed to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. But in 1997, Browne gave a speech at Stanford (a precursor to the one last spring) in which he acknowledged that there was now an ''effective consensus'' among the world's leading scientists regarding the human influence on the climate. ''The science wasn't complete -- but science is never complete,'' he said last spring. ''But they knew enough to say that there were long-term risks and that precautionary action was necessary if we were to avoid the greater risk -- of the evidence mounting to the point where draconian action was unavoidable.''In the continuing, ever-changing study of global warming, five years is an ice age, so it is hard to remember exactly how revolutionary this was, coming from the C.E.O. of a major oil company in 1997. But at the time, the American Petroleum Institute, of which BP had been a longstanding member, announced that Browne had, as he recalls, ''left the church.''''BP was the first to say that climate change was a problem, the first to take responsibility and the first to have an internal target'' for reducing their emissions, says Eileen Claussen, the president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. ''They were pretty brave.''In some respects, it was an act of corporate bravery for BP and, later, Royal Dutch/Shell and a handful of other companies, to buck their own industry. Unlike the tobacco companies, which for years denied that their products were causing harm -- or Exxon Mobil, which ran ads trying to discredit global-warming science -- BP and the others have been willing to confront the unpleasant truth that not only their business practices but also their core products are probable causes of global warming. In 1996, BP resigned from the Global Climate Coalition, then offered its support of the Kyoto Protocol and joined Claussen's Business Environmental Leadership Council, a program set up by the Pew Center to encourage private-sector involvement. In 1998, Browne publicly committed BP to cutting its carbon-dioxide emissions by 10 percent below 1990 levels by the year 2010, which was a 40 percent cut from business as usual and a target far more ambitious than the Kyoto Protocol itself. But it is not just altruism that has convinced Browne and these other C.E.O.'s to seize the moral high ground. Despite the Bush administration's stubborn refusal to deal with the issue, Browne says that he thinks there will soon be government regulation of greenhouse gases. And companies that have anticipated regulation will not only know how to use it to their advantage; they will also, as Browne puts it, ''gain a seat at the table, a chance to influence future rules.''And so, in order to meet its target for reducing its greenhouse-gas emissions, BP sought the advice of NGO's like the Pew Center and Environmental Defense and set up a system in which each of its 150 business units, spread across more than 100 countries, would be assigned a quota of emissions permits and encouraged to trade with one another. The company gave each business unit the choice of bringing itself into compliance by cutting its own emissions, buying emissions credits from other units or making enough greenhouse-gas reductions to have leftover permits that could be sold to other business units that violate their emissions ceilings. The motivation was simple enough: business units that reduced their emissions or cut their fuel consumption would have those savings count toward their bottom line, which, in turn, would be reflected in pay scales and bonuses at year's end. Many environmentalists are skeptical of such market-based solutions to global warming. For one thing, with such a vast number of different emissions sources and no single method for measuring emissions, enforcing compliance becomes hard, tempting companies to fudge the numbers. Then there's the matter of mitigation: why should polluters be allowed to trade emissions instead of being forced to solve the problem at its root? And will trading programs merely slow the growth rate of emissions when society's goal should be to engineer a fundamental shift away from fossil fuels? But emissions trading, which is part of the compliance mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol, is supported by the vast majority of economists, who believe that market-based mechanisms may be the most cost-effective -- and therefore most viable -- method of cutting greenhouse gases. And though it doesn't shift the energy basis of the economy, it does cut down on carbon emissions in absolute terms. When Browne stood up at Stanford this past spring, he was there to report hard numbers: BP had not just met its target -- to reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases by 10 percent below 1990 levels -- it had exceeded it, done so eight years ahead of schedule and with no net economic cost. In fact, because of energy efficiency measures, the emissions reductions amounted to a net gain of $600 million. ''And we are not,'' he told me later, ''an inefficient company.''BP's achievement complicates matters for Bush, who has pronounced the Kyoto Protocol ''fatally flawed'' because regulating carbon-dioxide emissions ''does not make economic sense for America.''That line of argument does not persuade Browne. ''If you say to people, 'Do you want to develop the world and have a good living standard, or do you want a safer environment?' people are terrified by the choice,'' Browne said to me last spring. ''That is a failure of leadership.'' Speaking of leadership, I asked, what did he think about Bush's position on the issue -- that caps on emissions would be too costly for American businesses? Browne paused, then answered, careful not to mention any names in particular: ''Well, it's unfair to the world to say that none of this is possible when it is.''Last summer, bp celebrated the 25th anniversary of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline. The company put on a big barbecue; speeches were given. But those celebrations were overshadowed by the fact that BP's North Slope production, which peaked at two million barrels a day in the mid-1980's, has dwindled to less than a million today. As production has declined, BP -- already the largest operator on the slope, with roughly 30 percent of the state's oil-extraction industry -- has lobbied to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to the east and built the first offshore oil projects in the Arctic Ocean to the north. BP's mantra is to make ''zero environmental impact'' and to leave only a ''small industrial footprint.'' And by most accounts, it does wield its ground-eviscerating equipment with great care. But the bottom line is that BP's stock price -- and its obligations to shareholders -- hinges on locating more oil fields. And any new field, subjected to the drill bit, is a potential insult to the earth. In the fall of 2000, Browne made it clear that if the Arctic refuge -- an iconic 19-million-acre tract of land in northeast Alaska that is home to polar bears and grizzlies, wolves, musk oxen and a 125,000-strong herd of caribou -- was opened up under a Republican administration, BP would be interested in exploring there. After all, the United States Geological Survey estimates that the refuge contains anywhere from 3 billion to 16 billion barrels of recoverable oil. Again on Feb. 13, 2001, three weeks after Bush took office, Browne acknowledged that BP openly supported efforts to drill. BP's stated intentions for the refuge happened to coincide with its ''Beyond Petroleum'' campaign, and environmentalists had a field day pointing out the inconsistencies. Greenpeace announced that until BP started seriously investing in renewables, a more fitting corporate logo would be, in the words of one spokeswoman, ''a miserable polar bear on an icecap shrinking because of global warming.'' John Browne himself was honored by Greenpeace for giving the ''Best Impression of an Environmentalist.'' And referring to the company's interest in the Arctic refuge, The Independent wrote that it was ''strange that a company boss with prominent green pretensions should advocate -- openly -- what many people would see as the industrial rape of an unspoiled wilderness.''The protests over BP's position on the Arctic refuge could not have come at a worse time. Just a few months earlier, the company's new advertising campaign was met in some corners with howls of derision and even demonstrations outside its London offices. Stung by the controversy, the company tried to pull several TV spots, and where that time was locked in by contract, BP lost ''several million dollars,'' according to two people involved in the ad campaign. In cases where ads could not be pulled, the company removed the words ''Beyond Petroleum.'' ''It's funny,'' says one of them, ''I never doubted that they were the most progressive oil company around, but they didn't think through what it would require from a P.R. point of view. By pulling the ads, they showed weakness rather than having the courage of their convictions, which is what the whole rebranding effort was all about.''Later, when the time came to prepare for the campaign's second phase, BP once again waffled over whether to use the phrase ''Beyond Petroleum.'' ''I was in so many meetings when the answer was no, yes, no, yes,'' says one member of the ad team. And the company's concern over how its P.R. message was being perceived delayed the campaign for more than a year. Eventually, the company once again embraced the phrase ''Beyond Petroleum.'' But according to one member of the ad team, BP, fearful of exaggerating its claims and opening itself to further criticism, worried the ad copy to death. ''All the definitive points they were making in the ads got slightly watered down,'' the ad-team member says. Finally, the company decided to use the tag line ''It's a start'' -- which can sound frank and refreshing or, depending on your point of view, hedging and defensive. Meanwhile, the issue of whether or not to drill in the Arctic refuge, at a time when BP's Alaska oil reserves are dwindling, still has the company tied up in knots. On the one hand, Browne no longer openly advocates drilling in the refuge, as he did in 2000 and 2001. On the other hand, when asked after his Stanford speech last spring what the company's position was, he disappointed environmentalists by refusing to rule out drilling altogether, saying, ''I believe we should have no part in that debate.''A BP consultant on environmental policy says of Browne, ''The impression he wants to leave is that it's all a process -- first Congress has to vote for drilling, then the company needs to assess its value, etc., but that even if it's opened, the company probably won't drill.'' But others who work with the company have privately heard just the opposite. ''One of their vice presidents told me flat out,'' another consultant says, '' 'If it's opened, we'll drill.'''BP's position on the refuge is ''evolving,'' according to Ronald Chappell, who was head of press relations for BP Alaska and who now works in its London headquarters. In the early to mid-90's, BP was engaged in lobbying to open the refuge. ''But,'' Chappell says, ''I think that the company has sort of decided that the role of corporations in public life is one of standing back and letting governments make decisions, trying to inform public policy but not making political contributions.''But, in fact, the company did make political contributions -- $560,000 through its employee political action committee in 2000, according to a BP spokeswoman. Moreover, at the time that Chappell and I spoke, the company was a member and contributor to Arctic Power, a prodevelopment lobbying group whose Internet site highlights ''top 10 reasons to support development in A.N.W.R.,'' and had a representative on the Arctic Power board. When I pointed this out to Chappell, he demurred, then sought me out a few minutes later, when I happened to be standing with Eileen Claussen of the Pew Center, one of John Browne's closest environmental advisers. ''I misspoke,'' Chappell said to us. ''It's true, we give to Arctic Power. We gave $50,000 last year but none so far this year. We also give to the American Petroleum Institute.''Claussen, looking at him, said what others - including many within the company -- think but will not say out loud: ''Shame on you.'' (Last month, BP withdrew from the group.)The arctic national Wildlife Refuge, which will once again be vulnerable to industry assault under the new Republican Congressional majority, is just one place BP may be interested in doing business. In recent years, it has also built Northstar, an artificial drilling island in the waters off Prudhoe Bay and the first offshore oil-exploration site in the Arctic Ocean, the oil flowing to the mainland through a six-mile undersea pipeline. And the company owns a 2.2 percent stake in PetroChina, the state-owned firm that is building a controversial pipeline across Tibet. These projects, as well as its interest in the refuge, have all been the subject of shareholder resolutions seeking to force BP to divest, to bring its actions in line with its rhetoric. And the resolutions (and BP's sometimes strong-arm legal tactics to quell them) all point out how difficult it is for an oil company to grow its business without also harming the environment. After violating federal clean-air laws at eight refineries across the country, BP, in January 2001, paid a $10 million penalty and agreed to spend $500 million modernizing its pollution-control technology. After delaying to report that its contractor had illegally dumped hazardous waste in northern Alaska, the company, in 1999, was fined $7 million in civil and criminal penalties. It may seem unfair that BP is the target of environmental and social-responsibility movements. Shouldn't Greenpeace et al. be going after Exxon Mobil, which still tries to sow public skepticism toward global warming theories and has reportedly worked behind the scenes to remove a prominent scientist from the United Nations climate change panel and still refuses to pay $5 billion in punitive damages ordered by an Alaska court after the 1989 Valdez oil spill? But BP has, by virtue of its slogans and its actions, tried to seize the moral high ground and so is judged by a different standard. Browne seems to understand this, and at Stanford last spring he outlined his next set of goals, ambitious by any standard: to reduce global-warming gases from BP's own operations as well as from the products it makes, to maintain CO2 emissions at current levels even as the company doubles its production of oil and gas, to make 50 percent of the company's pump sales worldwide come from clean fuels. Anticipating the future, BP bought Solarex in 1999 for $45 million, making it one of the largest solar companies in the world. It is also participating in fuel-cell technology research efforts with auto and engine manufacturers. And it is testing the viability of other energy sources like wind and hydrogen. Few question the idea that BP is now the most conscientious oil company around, or that Browne is deeply committed to cleaning up BP's act. One of Browne's closest colleagues suggests that he may go into the climate-change field after he retires from the oil business. Meanwhile, its competitors, according to a Royal Dutch/Shell executive, feel pressed by BP into taking ever-greener positions -- even Exxon Mobil has recently given a grant to Stanford University to study global warming. But while Browne and BP may show greater sensitivity to environmental concerns than any other company in its industry, it may also be impossible for any company that derives well over 90 percent of its revenue from fossil fuels to claim to be part of the solution. Despite its new sunburst logo and ''Beyond Petroleum'' slogan, BP still invests $12 billion, or 25 times more, on oil and gas than on its wind and solar division for the simple fact that, right now, there's a huge market for oil and almost none for solar panels. And that's not just BP's problem; that's ours. Ronald Chappell, the BP spokesman, says as much when he points out that all those environmentalists flying into the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to save the planet are using up a lot of airplane fuel to do it. ''That,'' he says, ''is the devil's bargain we all have made.''Darcy Frey is a contributing writer to the magazine. His last article was about the debate over oil drilling in ecologically sensitive regions.

President Bush's new five-year program of research into the causes of global warming and possible responses. The secretary is just a bit behind the times. There is already an enormous body of research on the subject, perhaps 20 years' worth, nearly all of it pointing to the need to adopt exactly the kind of remedial steps that the Bush administration has so far refused to take. What needs jump-starting is not research but policy. Obviously we could all benefit from research. Sophisticated modeling can tell us more about global climate change and instruct us in how best to adapt. But the world does not need another excuse from Mr. Bush to delay the political steps necessary to begin slowing emissions right away. The need for swift, collective action was the premise of the Kyoto Protocol on global climate change, not further study as the Bush Administration says. President Bush's Secretary of Commerce, Donald Evans, told more than 1,000 scientists, economists and other experts attending a conference on global warming last week that their task was to ''jump-start'' President Bush's new five-year program of research into the causes of global warming and possible responses. The secretary is just a bit behind the times. There is already an enormous body of research on the subject, perhaps 20 years' worth, nearly all of it pointing to the need to adopt exactly the kind of remedial steps that the Bush administration has so far refused to take. What needs jump-starting is not research but policy. Obviously we could all benefit from research. Sophisticated modeling can tell us more about global climate change and instruct us in how best to adapt. But the world does not need another excuse from Mr. Bush to delay the political steps necessary to begin slowing emissions right away. The window is closing fast. Even now, nations are making energy investments that will be with us for years to come. The International Energy Agency predicted recently that $4.2 trillion would be spent on new electric generating plants over the next 30 years worldwide -- an average investment of $140 billion a year -- and that most of these would be using outdated, highly polluting technologies. Every year of delay locks in more outmoded investment, adds to the carbon emissions already in the atmosphere and increases the ultimate costs of protecting the environment. The need for swift, collective action was the premise of the Kyoto Protocol on global climate change, which sought to reduce annual greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2010. Mr. Bush summarily rejected the Kyoto pact shortly after taking office. Even so, the rest of the world still looks to the United States for guidance and technology. This leaves it to a divided Congress to make the tough calls that Mr. Bush has avoided. The immediate remedies are plain enough: cleaner cars and cleaner power plants. Mr. Bush opposes any mandatory limits on carbon dioxide pollution from either source, preferring a voluntary approach. But voluntary steps have not worked with industry in the past and will not now. While some companies are eager to do something about global warming on their own, using available technologies, the private sector as a whole will not make serious investments in cleaner plants or more efficient automobiles as long as the rules favor dirtier and more profitable alternatives: aging coal-fired power plants and gas-guzzling S.U.V.'s. The rules have to change. There will undoubtedly be another effort in Congress to increase fuel economy standards. And there are two bills moving through the Senate that would reduce carbon dioxide emissions from power plants by combining mandatory caps with substantial, market-based financial rewards for operating more efficiently. The prospects for such legislation have not been improved, of course, by the election results and the ascendancy to key committee chairmanships of conservatives who, like Mr. Bush, worry about asking for any real sacrifice from industry. Even so, Mr. Bush knows that his own clean air legislation, which seeks new controls on every major air pollutant except the gas that causes global warming, stands little chance of success unless he also addresses the issue of carbon dioxide. In other words, if he wants progress on any air pollutant, he may finally be forced to deal with the most frightening one of all. Unless he does, all the research in the world won't help a bit.

When the telephone rings in this Dutchman's car, chances are that it is a windmill calling. A windmill?''It's telling me there's a problem, maybe it has stopped,'' said Herre van der Meulen, a technician at Nuon, a Dutch utility. He searches through his laptop, checks the disturbance and sends a telephone signal back to the computer aboard the windmill. Moments later, the blades are spinning again, yielding electricity. ''Usually I can fix most problems from a distance,'' he said. That he can do his job from afar is a good thing -- soon technicians may have little choice. Across wind-swept Northern Europe, hundreds of high-powered turbines are being planned or are under construction offshore, beyond the easy reach of engineers.''Going offshore is the new trend, and it's huge,'' said Bruce Douglas of the European Wind Energy Association, an industry group based in Brussels. ''The demonstration projects out at sea have been a success. Now people are going for full-scale marine wind parks. Some are close to land, some are so far you can't see them.''In the business, the talk is of a veritable rush offshore. Power companies are staking out suitable tracts of sandbanks, reefs and shallow open waters from the shores of Ireland to the Baltic Sea. They are joining with traditional offshore oil and gas companies, including giants like Shell, that have the capability to drill and rig up the 100-ton towers at sea. Engineers say that wind parks at sea have two main advantages: the wind blows harder and more steadily than on land and there are no residents protesting against great wind parks marring the landscape. On the Dutch coast near Lelystad, 28 windmills stand in a perfect lineup near the shore, anchored in about 20 feet of water. The swoosh of the wind going over the blades is barely audible, even drowned out by the squawking of the sea gulls.''It's new, it's clean, it's high tech,'' said Henk Kouwenhoven, a manager of Nuon, who watched the towers go up in 1996. ''The offshore potential is enormous. Here we never run out of wind. It blows 90 percent of the time. The main issue is making it cost-efficient.''Europe's wind-driven energy has been growing at 40 percent a year. With a capacity of more than 20,000 megawatts installed on land, it now represents three-fourths of the world's total wind-power output. Europe hopes to raise this to 60,000 megawatts in the next six years. Much of that growth is expected to come from sea-based turbines.''It's going so fast now because there is a race to go offshore, with manufacturers and utilities competing for the jobs,'' said Corin Millais of the European Wind Energy Association. ''Companies are now talking of wind fields, like oil reserves or coal reserves, waiting to be tapped. The beauty of it is that it is inexhaustible.''Advocates see the move offshore as an impressive rite of passage in the history of an ancient technology. For centuries, tapping the wind was the domain of the miller, his family and his hand-set sails. Even modern wind energy had humble beginnings in Europe. In the 1970's, it was started by grass-roots groups of often politically motivated investors putting up one or two private windmills. There are still thousands of private owners in Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands. But wind power is no longer a cottage industry, and the windmills of today are not the charming, stubby kind that once pumped much of this country dry and became a national emblem. These are the modern variety, called turbines, that are becoming sleeker, taller and more powerful by the year.''The largest turbines now produce 250 times more electricity than the ones built 20 years ago,'' Mr. Millais said. Today wind provides some 28 million Europeans with electricity, he said, about half of them in Germany, Europe's largest producer. The European Union has been pushing to develop alternatives to fossil fuels, which are widely believed to contribute to global warming. It wants 22 percent of its electricity -- and 12 percent of all energy -- to come from renewable sources by 2010, to meet its commitment under the Kyoto treaty to reduce greenhouse gases. In the United States, wind energy has stalled at about one-fifth of Europe's capacity. Here, wind projects have been encouraged with incentives like tax credits and guaranteed rates, and the emphasis is now shifting offshore. About 100 sea-based turbines are already operating. This year, Britain, Denmark, Germany, Ireland and the Netherlands have all earmarked large offshore sites and issued licenses. Some of the projects are scheduled to be ready next year. The new endeavors are not without problems or critics. Environmental groups are divided. Some defend the wind turbines as a renewable source of pollution-free energy, while others fear the offshore turbines will disturb fishing and spawning grounds and endanger flocks of birds that migrate at night. In Britain and Norway, the military has objected to some designated coastal sites, saying that wind parks can produce false radar echoes and disturb telecommunications. There are other hurdles as well. Offshore turbines may be more productive, but building costs are 50 percent higher than on land and maintenance is difficult in a region where winters bring Atlantic gales. ''When waves are up and your boat sways back and forth, it's unsafe to try and get onto the landing platform,'' said Mr. van der Meulen, the technician who monitors about 200 windmills scattered over a large area, including some at sea. ''You can do maintenance work really only in the summer.''Then there is the issue of price. Industry spokesmen contend that, strictly speaking, the price of wind-driven energy is close to being competitive with other sources. They argue that traditional fossil fuels and nuclear energy get enormous hidden or indirect subsidies, to the tune of billions of dollars a year. For example, in some European countries, governments pay for the insurance of nuclear power plants. While no one expects wind to become more important than traditional power sources, enthusiasts are undeterred, and the growth of wind-powered turbines is likely to continue. Denmark already uses wind to produce 18 percent of its electricity, the world's highest per capita consumption. Britain intends to catch up. The British have designated 12 offshore turbine sites. Brian Wilson, the energy minister, said studies had shown there is enough wind to provide electricity for the whole country. He said he expected the global market for offshore energy to be worth $12 billion by 2007. Most of that, he said, will be in Europe.''I don't see anything stopping offshore electricity now,'' said Mr. Kouwenhoven, of Nuon, which has teamed up with Royal Dutch Shell in a joint venture. ''Shell knows the offshore business, we know the wind business. It's just a matter of moving ahead.''

To the Editor:You say (''Still Lagging on Warming,'' editorial, Dec. 8) that ''the world still looks to the United States for guidance and technology.''Another article the same day talks about energy from wind turbines (''Wind Turbines Are Sprouting Off Europe's Shores'') and where the United States stands on this clean energy source. In the United States, you report, ''wind energy has stalled at about one-fifth of Europe's capacity.''Further, garbage incineration can be done more cleanly with today's technology. Yet with the closing of the Fresh Kills landfill, New York City is exporting its garbage to other states at great cost. Likewise, energy conservation does not receive needed attention and follow-up. What we need is heavier taxation of energy; use the revenues to maintain a decent road system!Finally, resistance to the Kyoto accord on global warming is cheap politicking, not leadership. CARLO R. SCHWEIZER  New York, Dec. 10, 2002

The House of Commons voted overwhelmingly to ratify the Kyoto climate change protocol today, but widespread disapproval by powerful provincial governments and business groups has called into question whether the agreement will ever be fully put in place in Canada. Proponents said Canada's ratification was a major step forward for the 1997 treaty. Canada, one of the world's largest producers of carbon dioxide emissions per capita, is one of only a few large polluting countries among about 100 nations to have ratified or moved toward ratification. But as the debate here heated up in recent weeks, the Liberal government compromised on previous commitments to control emissions in an effort to assuage the auto and oil industries and counter a national campaign against the accord financed by the Alberta provincial government. Under Canadian law, the 195-to-77 vote today was not necessary. It takes only a vote by the cabinet to ratify international treaties. That vote, which is expected next week, is considered a formality, because all the cabinet ministers voted in favor of the resolution in the House of Commons. Prime Minister Jean Chrtien, who has made the Kyoto accord a centerpiece of his agenda, hoped that approval by the House of Commons, including the votes of the opposition Bloc Qubcois and the social democratic New Democratic Party, would signify broad national support. The impact of the vote, however, was reduced by a procedural vote in the House on Monday to shut off debate. Several influential Liberal lawmakers, including former Finance Minister Paul Martin, abstained from the procedural vote. Mr. Martin, who is the leading contender to succeed Mr. Chrtien as the Liberal leader and prime minister when he steps down in early 2004, said he believed that the debate over the Kyoto accord should have continued, to build consensus before ratification went forward. Mr. Martin's abstention was viewed by Ralph Klein, the premier of Alberta, and other opponents as a signal that he would not wholeheartedly press for industrial curbs should he take over the government. Mr. Klein has warned that he could sue the federal government over the Kyoto accord, noting that under Canadian law the provinces have control over natural resources. Under the accord, by 2012 Canada would be required to reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases by 6 percent from 1990 levels. Of the country's total 240-megaton target for emissions reductions, business would be required to contribute 23 percent of the decreases. To meet the targets, the government has proposed measures including improving public transit, increasing parking fees in big cities and encouraging more freight transport by train. Auto companies based in Canada would be required to make new vehicles that are 25 percent more efficient by 2010, and coal-fired industries would be obliged to either reduce emissions or spend hundreds of millions of dollars a year purchasing ''emissions credits'' from countries outside Canada. Under the Kyoto protocol, countries can sell and purchase parts of their carbon monoxide emissions allotments, allowing countries that are falling behind in their obligations to purchase excess emission credits from countries that are ahead of schedule in order to meet their targets.

THE END OF THE AMERICAN ERA  U.S. Foreign Policy and the Geopolitics of the 21st Century  By Charles A. Kupchan  391 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $27.95. The vision of the future set forth in Charles A. Kupchan's new book, ''The End of the American Era,'' is a startling and often puzzling one: he predicts that a ''decline of American hegemony will play itself out over this decade and the next,'' with the United States ''losing interest in playing the role of global protector of last resort'' and the European Union ''becoming a new center of global power.''''The stability and order that devolve from American preponderance will gradually be replaced by renewed competition for primacy,'' he writes. ''The unstoppable locomotive of globalization will run off its tracks as soon as Washington is no longer at the controls. Pax Americana is poised to give way to a much more unpredictable and dangerous global environment. And the chief threat will come not from the likes of Osama bin Laden, but from the return of traditional geopolitical rivalry.''In these pages Mr. Kupchan -- a professor of international relations at Georgetown University and a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations -- tries to articulate a hugely ambitious vision of global geopolitics; he not only aspires to chart America's role in the coming century, but also attempts to set forth a theory of historical change, ranging from the days of hunters and gatherers through the dawning of the digital era. He wants to assess the consequences of what he sees as post-cold-war complacency in American foreign policy and to promote his own brand of ''liberal internationalism'' that might guide the country toward ''multilateral engagement through international institutions.''''The End of the American Era'' attests to a wide-ranging historical intelligence and a dedicated study of strategic issues. But while Mr. Kupchan has important and timely things to say about America's time-honored traditions of unilateralism and isolationism, weaknesses in his central thesis (and his tendency to subordinate empirical evidence to that thesis) are pointed up by developments that have taken place in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 9/11 (dealt with in this book mainly in brief asides) and more pointedly in the last few months with the Bush administration's move against Iraq. Mr. Kupchan dismissively contends that ''the appropriate analogy for the battle against terrorism is the war on drugs or the effort to combat organized crime,'' and he worries that the events of last year will make it ''even less likely that the United States will bring into focus more profound, even if more distant, threats to America's well-being.''He also predicts that in the face of terrorist threats, America will ''rein in its overseas commitments in an attempt to cordon itself off from such threats,'' that in the post-cold-war era, the United States ''will no longer feel compelled to play the role of global guardian'' and will instead pursue ''a more diffident'' foreign policy, predictions that fly in the face of President Bush's aggressive new doctrine of pre-emptive action, and his determination to go after Saddam Hussein. At the same time the president's avowals that the United States will go it alone against Iraq if necessary underscore the relevance of the many discussions in this book about America's ''long-standing aversion to multilateral institutions'': its ''unwillingness to compromise the freedom of unilateral initiative'' and the possibly dangerous consequences of this stance. Mr. Kupchan reminds us of the Bush administration's decision to withdraw from both the Kyoto Protocol on global warming and the Antiballistic Missile Treaty and its opposition to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the International Criminal Court. He describes the resentment that such stands have engendered among our allies, and he suggests that such behavior could undermine the international institutions the country ''worked so hard to put in place after World War II.''''The United States may have the luxury of being headstrong,'' he writes, ''while it still enjoys primacy; smaller states have little choice but to play along. But when America's dominance is less pronounced and other centers of power have the wherewithal to stand their ground, its unilateral impulse will serve only to guarantee the return of global geopolitical rivalry.''In the course of this book Mr. Kupchan does a nimble job of exposing the obvious flaws in Francis Fukuyama's ''End of History'' argument: a willfully sunny thesis that sees democratic states coming together in a new era of peaceful global order. But he is considerably less adept at taking apart Samuel Huntington's theory that rancorous fault lines are bound to emerge between clashing civilizations, bluntly and improbably stating that ''there is scant evidence to support the claim that other cultures will clash with the West.''Mr. Kupchan's method throughout this book is to use historical analogies to shed light on contemporary problems: he draws comparisons between the unification of Germany and the emergence of the European Union, between the boom and bust of the 1920's and 30's, and current economic woes. The problem with this approach, however, is that it plays down enormous changes in the historical environment -- from the spread of democracy to advances in technology -- and it also lends itself to alarmist sentiments. For instance, in discussing the growing power of Europe and its growing estrangement from Washington, Mr. Kupchan ominously urges us to remember ''the rapid demise'' of the Roman empire, ''after the founding of a second capital in Constantinople.''Mr. Kupchan believes that ''the United States cannot and should not resist the end of the American era,'' and he concludes this provocative but unconvincing book with the wildly broad assertion that the ''end of the American era'' will also mark ''the end of the era that America has played such a large role in shaping -- the era of industrial capitalism, republican democracy and the nation-state.'' It's an assertion -- like much of the more speculative theorizing in this book -- that is not supported by the marshaling of persuasive evidence. BOOKS OF THE TIMES

In a novel legal action, the City Councils of Oakland, Calif., and Boulder, Colo., have voted to join Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace in a lawsuit charging two federal agencies with failing to conduct environmental reviews before financing projects that the cities say contribute to global warming. The lawsuit contends that the agencies -- the Export-Import Bank and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation -- have provided $32 billion in financing and insurance over the last 10 years for fossil-fuel extraction projects overseas like oil fields, pipelines and coal-fired power plants without assessing the contribution those projects make to global warming. Spokesmen for the two federal agencies, which provide financing for American corporations for projects that commercial banks often deem too risky, said they could not comment on the specifics of the lawsuit because they were in litigation but they said they followed good environmental practices. Mayor Jerry Brown of Oakland, who is a former governor of California and a former presidential candidate, said in an interview today that the suit was necessary because ''there's been such an abject failure on the part of the Bush administration to protect the people of this country from the seriously deleterious effects of climate disruption.''The Oakland city council, which voted on Dec. 17 to join the suit, contends that global warming could cause the sea levels to rise, putting the city's groundwater aquifers at risk of saltwater contamination and threatening to flood the airport and sewer systems. Mayor Will Toor of Boulder, said in a statement that Boulder officials, who voted to join the suit in August, were disturbed by predictions that global warming would bring more rain and less snow, which could threaten water availability in much of the West, where the water supply relies on gradual melting of the annual snowpack. At the same time, Mr. Toor said that predictions of severe drought could require water restrictions and might mean an increased risk of wildfires, which could affect not only human life but the city budget to the tune of millions of dollars. The Bush administration, which rejected joining the Kyoto Treaty on climate change, has been increasingly criticized for its climate policy, even though last year President Bush accepted findings by a panel of American experts that most of the global warming in recent decades had been caused by human activity. Last year, Mr. Bush set a climate policy that until 2012 would rely on voluntary measures by industries to slow growth in emissions of carbon dioxide and the other heat-trapping gases. He said more research was needed to clarify the potential environmental risks of warming before stronger measures were taken, although White House officials said recently that they might speed up their timetable in seeking compliance. Bo Ollison, a spokesman for the Export-Import bank, said that the bank had followed all necessary procedures in its projects. ''The bank is very confident that we apply all rules, laws and regulations, including N.E.P.A., whenever we do a transaction,'' he said. Lawrence Spinelli, a spokesman for the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, said, ''All projects OPIC supports must meet the strictest environmental standards.'' He added, ''Project sponsors must provide environmental impact assessments, major projects are posted on the OPIC Web site to allow for public comment, and, where appropriate, OPIC's environmental staff will actually visit the host country of a potential project to conduct due diligence.''The suit, however, filed in United States District Court in San Francisco, says the two agencies have refused to review the fossil-fuel projects they are involved in for their effects on climate change and that such reviews are required by the federal government.''The case law is clear,'' said Brian Dunkiel, a Vermont lawyer representing the environmental groups and the cities. The National Environmental Policy Act, he said, ''requires agencies to look at the impacts of their activities if a decision is made in the United States and the activity causes impact on the United States or on the global commons,'' meaning Antarctica and the international oceans. Mr. Dunkiel added, ''The agencies say there is no significant impact, but they have made that determination without doing an environmental assessment.''He said the suit targets these two relatively obscure federal agencies because the fossil-fuel projects that they finance account for the release of significant carbon dioxide emissions, both agencies ''have virtually completely evaded all'' National Environmental Policy Act review, and they were both designated by the administration as playing a major role in the Bush/Cheney energy plan. The suit seeks to have the agencies conduct the environmental reviews on their future energy projects so that their claims of no significant impact can be scrutinized.

Climate experts say global temperatures in 2003 could match or beat the modern record set in 1998. Climate experts say global temperatures in 2003 could match or beat the modern record set in 1998, when temperatures were raised sharply by El Nio, a periodic disturbance of Pacific Ocean currents that warms the atmosphere. El Nio that year was the strongest ever measured. A new one is brewing in the Pacific but is expected to remain relatively weak, experts say. Still, they say, a persistent underlying warming trend could be enough to push temperatures to record highs. Some of the warming could be the result of natural climate variation, but the experts say it is almost impossible to explain without including the heat-trapping properties of rising levels of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases emitted by smokestacks and tailpipes. The mounting evidence of human contributions to climate warming has raised pressure on American policy makers to reconsider their reliance on voluntary measures for reducing heat-trapping emissions. At a meeting of climate scientists organized by the Bush administration this month, White House officials said President Bush was no longer locked into the stance he announced last year -- calling for nothing beyond voluntary measures to slow the growth in emissions until 2012. And Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, plan to introduce legislation early in 2003 that would gradually establish mandatory greenhouse gas restrictions and a system in which companies could trade credits they would earn by making emissions cuts. The European Union, Japan and most other industrial powers have ratified the Kyoto Protocol, a treaty that, once in effect, will require them to make reductions. The growing shift toward action in the American debate over greenhouse emissions comes after a decade of mounting evidence that the recent warming is caused mainly by rising concentrations of such substances. The main means of tracking climate change has been to synthesize hundreds of measurements of surface temperatures around the world into a global average. This average reading is meaningless for any particular spot, but it is a valuable way to measure long-term trends, and it puts the planet in its warmest period in a millennium, with the trajectory still headed upward. According to the Commerce Department, the global average surface temperature increased at a rate of about one degree per 100 years over the 20th century, but since 1976 the earth has been warming at the rate of about three degrees per century. The Hadley Center for Climate Prediction and Research in Britain put the odds at 50-50 for 2003 to match or exceed the temperature record set in 1998. Dr. James E. Hansen, the director of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Goddard Institute for Space Studies, put the odds higher than that, barring a big new sun-blocking volcano or the like. A decade-long paucity of big volcanic eruptions and a peak in solar intensity can account for only part of the overall warming, he said, adding, ''Clearly it's primarily due to human forcing.''The global average temperature reached 58.0 degrees in 1998, while the average from 1880 to 2001 was 56.9 degrees. Preliminary estimates put the global temperature in 2002 at 57.9 degrees. Areas like Alaska have experienced sharper warming, in patterns that largely match projections produced by computer simulations of the climatic effect of rising greenhouse gases. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported this month that satellite tracking of surface conditions on Greenland's vast ice sheet saw more melting last summer than at any time in the 24-year satellite record. Arctic sea ice also retreated more than it had done before in that span, the agency said. These time spans are short when it comes to climate, and polar experts say it remains exceedingly difficult to ascribe regional changes to human actions rather than natural cycles in ocean and weather circulation around the Northern Hemisphere. The continuing global climb in temperatures, however, is getting harder to link to natural climate fluctuations, many scientists say. Even if 2003 does not set a record, many experts say, it almost undoubtedly will follow a generation-long rise in temperatures that has put the planet on course for substantial shifts in drought and storm patterns, continuing and significant retreats of terrestrial ice, and a resulting rise in sea levels in coming decades. This month, American and British climate teams and the World Meteorological Organization reported that 2002 would nudge out 2001 as the second-warmest year since the late 1800's. Some scientists still doubt that the human influence will alter the climate beyond the range of natural variability, which they say has produced significant shifts in past eras and will inevitably do so again.''We don't really know enough about the climate to say with any confidence how much of this warming is natural and how much is caused by human activities,'' said Dr. John R. Christy, the director of the Earth System Science Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. But his view is held by an ever-shrinking minority of climate experts, partly because new analyses are questioning some of their conclusions. In 1990, Dr. Christy and a team that included NASA satellite experts pioneered a method for measuring the average temperature of the atmosphere above the surface, using instruments on weather satellites. In a series of papers examining three decades of satellite data, they reported cooling or only slight warming, and the findings were highlighted by skeptics of the greenhouse theory among climatologists and policy makers. A new analysis of the same data by an independent team of scientists suggests that much more warming is under way in the upper atmosphere -- more than three times as much as Dr. Christy estimated. These analyses are more in line with surface trends and estimates produced by computer models. The new results were described in a news release this month by the Commerce Department but have not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal. The scientific teams with differing views of the satellite temperature data argued at several scientific meetings this year, including the meeting convened this month by the administration to set priorities for climate research. At the meeting, Dr. Christy and the head of the other group, Frank J. Wentz, the founder of Remote Sensing Systems, a company that analyzes satellite data for the government, agreed to share more data and information on the way they arrived at their results. While the debate about the amount of atmospheric warming plays out, there is little disagreement about the extent of warming at the surface. The shifts around the Arctic -- whether natural or human-induced -- are profound, said Dr. Waleed Abdalati, NASA's director of polar programs.''The Greenland melting or the changes in ocean circulation or sea ice, any one of those is kind of a 'Wow, that's interesting,' '' he said.''But when you see them collectively and kind of working in concert with one another,'' Dr. Abdalati added, ''that's very significant.''The result could be some significant surprises, he said. This year, Dr. Abdalati was a co-author of a study showing that the surface melting in Greenland, for example, was unexpectedly accelerating the seaward crawl of the ice sheet as the melt water percolated down through more than a half mile of ice and lubricated the interface between the grinding sheet and the rock below. Should the Greenland ice continue to accelerate, that could require scientists to change their projections of how much a little warming could raise sea levels.

